Title: Femtosecond all-optical coherent control of spin polarization in altermagnets

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.29641v1

Published Time: Wed, 01 Apr 2026 01:06:30 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
# Femtosecond all-optical coherent control of spin polarization in altermagnets 

# K. J¨ ackel 1, H. Grisk 1, N. Dornquast 1, M. Gaerner 2, G. Reiss 2, T. Kuschel 2,3 , J. Walowski 1, and M. M ¨ unzenberg 11Institut f ¨ ur Physik, Universit¨ at Greifswald, Felix-Hausdorff-Straße 6, 17489 Greifswald, Germany 

2Faculty of Physics, Bielefeld University, Universit¨ atsstraße 25, 33615 Bielefeld, Germany 

3Institute of Physics, Johannes Gutenberg University Mainz, Staudinger Weg 7, 55128 Mainz, Germany April 1, 2026 

Abstract 

Altermagnets constitute an emerging materials platform for spintronic technologies by combining compensated magnetic order with ferromagnet-like spin-split electronic bands. Here, we investigate the proposed d-wave al-termagnetic material RuO 2 using circularly polarized ultrashort laser pulses. Time-resolved magneto-optical Kerr effect measurements, which are intrin-sically sensitive to surface and interface states, reveal the ultrafast spin re-sponse of RuO 2. In contrast to the demagnetization dynamics characteristic of conventional ferromagnets, we observe a distinct coherent contribution to the complex Kerr rotation that appears during the light–matter interac-tion and lasts for ∼ 200 fs . Similar signatures have been associated with spin–momentum locking and directional band splitting in spin-split surface states of topological insulators as well as spin–orbit–coupled semiconduc-tors and are governed by a finite Raman coherence time. We interpret this 

1

> arXiv:2603.29641v1 [cond-mat.other] 31 Mar 2026

coherent response as evidence for transient spin-polarized surface states in RuO 2, consistent with the emergence of altermagnetic surface states that are directly relevant to spin-polarized transport at surfaces and interfaces. 

# 1 Introduction Δ𝜏 ∼200fs Δ𝜏 ∼200fs            

> a)
> b)
> c)
> “Butterfly” structure
> -k+k kx
> ky
> E
> E
> -k+k
> E
> kx
> ky
> E
> d-wave (d,g,i ..) s-wave
> Ferromagnet Antiferromagnet Altermagnet Topological Insulator
> ~SO ~exch
> Δ𝜀 𝐾
> Δ𝜀 𝐾
> Δ𝜃 𝐾 Δ𝜃 𝐾
> Δ𝜏 ∼200fs
> Δ𝜃 𝐾
> d)
> Δ𝜀 𝐾
> Δ𝜀 𝐾
> Δ𝜃 𝐾
> Δ𝜏 ∼200fs
> Linear behaviour

Figure 1: a) Illustrates the most basic crystal structures with either up- or down-oriented, or zero magnetic moment, in orange, green, and gray, respectively, for ferromagnets, antiferromagnets, topological insulators, and altermagnets (from left to right). b) A cross-section through the Fermi surfaces for all four material systems. c) We apply selective pumping processes by utilizing circularly polar-ized photons to enhance specific electron transitions. d) This leads to material-distinct magnetization dynamics, measured by time-resolved magneto-optical Kerr-effect, apparent in the relation between the real ∆θK and the imaginary ∆ϵK

parts of the complex Kerr rotation. Transient spin polarized states (e.g. topolog-ical insulators and altermagnets) produce characteristic ”butterfly” structures in materials with ⃗ k dependent electron spin within the first 200 fs after the excitation with ultrashort laser pulses ∼ 45 fs . In (anti-) ferromagnets, the electron spin is, in first order, independent of ⃗ k, revealing a linear relation. 2The integration of spintronics into modern information technology has cat-alyzed an intensive search for emergent physical effects and materials that can be seamlessly integrated into scalable device platforms. Using spin-dependent transport and collective phenomena, spintronic architectures promise reduced power consumption, increased functional density, and compatibility with exist-ing semiconductor technologies. This positions spin-based computing as a com-pelling route toward energy-efficient, on-chip implementations of neuromorphic, probabilistic, and hybrid quantum information processing [1]. Altermagnets have emerged as a new magnetic paradigm. The altermagnetic spin order combines anisotropic, non-relativistic, spin-split bands with a com-pensated, collinear spin arrangement [2, 3, 4, 5]. This occurrence expands the material base for spin-based information technologies by combining a compen-sated collinear spin structure with spin-split electronic bands, thereby overcom-ing the long-standing limitations of conventional collinear antiferromagnets in device operation and readout. The symmetry-driven origin of this effect enables efficient electrical control and detection of spin-polarized currents, while preserv-ing the intrinsic robustness of the compensated magnetic order. Consequently, al-termagnetic materials offer an attractive route to scalable spintronic architectures that enable high-efficiency magnetoresistive effects and current-induced torques, with direct relevance to memory, logic, and neuromorphic computing [6]. Generally, materials with an antiferromagnetic spin arrangement exhibit spin-degenerate bands because of a preserved PT-symmetry, prohibiting large spin-polarizations arising from spin-split bands. In altermagnets, however, the op-posite spin sublattices are connected by rotations, such as C4 and C6, instead of translation or inversion [3]. This leads to momentum-dependent spin polariza-tion, producing alternating spin textures in k-space. They are even in momen-tum s(k)=s( −k), and are classified by orbital symmetry representations, such as d-wave (e.g. RuO 2, Mn 5Si 3 [3, 7, 8, 9], MnF 2 [3, 10, 11]) or g-wave (e.g. MnTe [12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17], CrSb [18, 19] or Fe 2O3 [20, 21]), and higher orders [3], giv-ing altermagnets a unique fingerprint. A quick characterization of materials for spintronics applications requires an essential piece of information: the spin po-larization of currents in a specific direction. Our work is built around this cen-tral idea, which is similar to the mechanisms introduced in an earlier publication [22]. We perform ultrafast spin dynamics experiments using the time-resolved 3magneto-optical Kerr effect (tr-MOKE) to benchmark the spintronic properties in RuO 2. In the case of half metals, the spin polarization is determined via the demagnetization time. A fundamental principle prohibits spin scattering at the Fermi level for half metals, e.g., Fe 3O4, CrO 2, and La 0.66 Sr 0.33 MnO 3, leading to an increased demagnetization time τM by two orders of magnitude, which is directly related to the degree of spin-polarization P . In altermagnets, we show that we can benchmark the spin-splitting and spin polarization of the bands in materials with spin-split electron bands by inducing an ultrafast coherent spin polarization, using circularly polarized laser pulses (Raman model). The Raman coherence time τR creates a temporal delay between the complex Kerr angle components, allowing to trace fingerprints of their altermagnetic properties. Fig. 1 explains the underlying principle of our approach by comparing the characteristics of three intensively investigated material classes for spintronics applications, ferromagnets, antiferromagnets, and topological insulators, with the typical properties of a d-wave altermagnet. With Figs. 1 a) and b) point-ing out the fundamental crystal symmetries and the spin alignments of the ma-terials. Ferromagnets and antiferromagnets exhibit parallel or antiparallel spin orientations (see Fig. 1 a)), respectively, with corresponding spin-split or non-spin-split Fermi surfaces (see Fig. 1 b)). Topological insulators do not necessarily have assigned magnetic net moments, but due to spin-orbit interaction, electrons in surface layers form localized circular currents with a locked spin-momentum. This symmetry is broken along the surfaces, enabling direction-dependent spin currents [23]. Altermagnets, such as RuO 2, possess spin-opposite sublattices with antiparallel alignment and therefore a compensated magnetic moment. The mag-netization density of the magnetic atoms in the lattice is anisotropic, leading to time-reversal symmetry breaking and the appearance of the anisotropic spin-splitting (c.f. Fig. 1 a),b)). For all these four material classes, different transitions can be selectively in-duced by opposite photon helicities, as shown in Fig. 1 c). In ferromagnets and antiferromagnets, these excitations are mainly ⃗ k independent. However, for topological insulators and altermagnets, the excitation by circularly polarized photons strongly depends on the ⃗ k direction. We investigate this band splitting by applying femtosecond-laser-pulse-driven excitation with opposite helicities, while probing the temporal evolution of both complex Kerr-angle components, 4the Kerr rotation ∆θK and the Kerr ellipticity ∆ϵK . The induced transient spin-polarization proved to be coherent with the femtosecond laser pulse excitation. For altermagnets and topological insulators, the complex Kerr angle shows a spe-cific time delay between the real part, ∆θK , and the imaginary part, ∆ϵK , for Raman times τR > 0 (c.f. Fig. 1 d)). We dub this characteristic shape the ”but-terfly” structure. This signature is already established for topological insulators [24], while this manuscript aims to discuss the butterfly structure in altermag-nets. Although coherent induced effects were first identified and analyzed in ferromagnets by Bigot et al. [25], generally demagnetization effects dominate the spin-dynamics processes in these materials. They suppress potential time de-lays between the complex Kerr-angle components, resulting in a linear relation between them [26]. One intensively explored candidate material that promises d-wave altermag-netic ordering is RuO 2. It would have the benefits, but also overcome the lim-itations of traditional antiferromagnetic spintronics [27], as it exhibits spin-split bands ∼ 1200 meV and a critical temperature above room temperature ( ∼ 400 K )[3]. But this material is not without controversy. On the one hand, Valenti, Mazin, and coworkers [28] calculated an extraordinary strain necessary to realize mag-netic ordering in RuO 2. In addition, muon spin relaxation spectroscopy and neu-tron scattering experiments [29, 30] as well as spintronic THz emitter application experiments [31] point to the absence of magnetic order in bulk and ultra-thin films. This outcome is supported by several other research groups in various ex-periments [32, 33, 34, 35]. On the other hand, further research groups reported signatures of the anomalous Hall effect [36, 37], spin-polarized currents [38, 39, 40, 41], and spin-split bands in angle-resolved photoemission spectroscopy mea-surements [42, 43] for the proposed d-wave altermagnet RuO 2. Those insights im-ply altermagnetically ordered moments, as their presence is necessary to measure the listed effects. More recent studies reveal that a closer look at the discussed phenomena is crucial due to their entanglement with other spintronic effects, e.g. the anisotropic (inverse) spin Hall effect in RuO 2 [35, 44]. These contradictory ex-perimental results highlight the balance act required to magnetically order RuO 2,which is heavily influenced by sample parameters, e.g., strain, which varies de-pending on substrate choice, layer thickness, and growth conditions [45, 46, 47]. Recent low-energy muon spin relaxation spectroscopy with depth-resolved 5sensitivity performed in transverse magnetic fields from 4 K to 290 K using muon implantation energies around 1 keV reveals magnetic signals originating from surface regions ( ∼ 10 nm ) in 30 nm thick films [48]. The authors find that these sig-nals remain robust throughout various substrate and growfth conditions. These findings underscore the importance of reduced-dimensional contributions and motivate further investigations into the role of defects, strain, and stoichiometry for the magnetic properties of RuO 2, especially at its surface. Therefore, surface-sensitive experiments, including magneto-optical Kerr effect (MOKE) measure-ments, are the methods of choice to investigate the electron band spin-splitting of these magnetic surface states. We use a pump-probe scheme depicted in Fig. 2 a) to investigate spin dynamics. Altermagnetic signatures appear in the change of both Kerr angle components as functions of time delay ∆τ after excitation by a pump pulse. Fig. 1 d) shows the expected relation for the change between both Kerr angle components, the Kerr rotation, and the Kerr ellipticity on a femtosecond time scale for the un-derlying band structures of the magnetic materials introduced above. In this ex-periment, ferromagnets demagnetize ultrafast on the sub-picosecond timescale, followed by a slow recovery lasting tens of picoseconds regardless of photon he-licity. This ultrafast demagnetization process leads to a change in ∆θK , while 

∆ϵK reacts to the shift in the electron population. Both changes occur simulta-neously. This mechanism holds for antiferromagnets, where THz spin preces-sion dominates the signal. In topological insulators, circularly polarized pho-tons selectively excite electrons with the corresponding ⃗ k and its associated spin. This process, combined with the characteristic decay, manifests itself in the ex-periment as a time delay between ∆θK and ∆ϵK , yielding a butterfly structure in the complex plane spanned by both components of the Kerr angle. Finally, altermagnets exhibit ⃗ k direction-dependent spin states, acting similarly to spin-momentum-locked states in topological insulators. Those states initiate the same characteristic patterns in the complex plane as observed in topological insulators, the butterfly patterns. Thus, different shapes of the components of the real and imaginary Kerr angle are created via the Kramers-Kronig relation [24]. We investigate d ≈ 20 nm thick RuO 2 films with a (110) orientation and a 

3 nm Pt capping, grown on (110)-oriented TiO 2 or (001)-oriented MgO substrates. In this geometry, we rotate the samples and thus the opposite-spin sublattices 6c) front:   

> RuO 2 [110]
> RuO 2[11 0]
> RuO 2[001]
> a)
> RuO 2 [001]
> MgO  [110 ] /  TiO 2 [001 ]
> b) cross section
> MgO  [001] /  TiO 2 [110]

Figure 2: The setup a) employs a double modulation time-resolved pump-probe MOKE scheme to extract dynamics on the femtosecond timescale. A photo-elastic modulator modulates the probe, and a mechanical chopper modulates the pump beam. The sample is rotated by the angle α indicated by the blue arrow. Crystal structure overview, cross-section b), and front view c). The grey arrows mark the crystal directions. The N´ eel vector points in the [001] direction. Oxygen atoms are colored red, Ru atoms in either sublattice are colored orange/green with their corresponding magnetic moment hinted by arrows. The oval and circular struc-tures in orange and green indicate a cut through the Fermi surface. around the [110] direction axis by an angle α. Typically, the Ne´ el vector points in the RuO 2 [001] direction. Therefore, in our geometry, the spin orientation re-mains in the sample plane, together with the spin-split Fermi surface from one sublattice, leaving the spin-split Fermi surface of the other sublattices directed out-of-plane (see Fig. 2 b),c)). Looking from the [110] direction axis, a spin split-ting occurs in the Γ point to M point direction, but not in the Γ point to Z point direction [49]. We excite the dynamics by employing linear ( π) (electric field vec-tor parallel to the plane of incidence or p-polarization) and circularly ( σ±) po-larized pump pulses to elaborate differences in the momentum transfer from the photons. For this, we record the variations in the Kerr rotation ∆θK and the Kerr ellipticity ∆ϵK as functions of the time-delay ∆τ after excitation by pump pulses. We record these dynamics for a complete sample rotation around the surface nor-mal axis in α = 15 ◦ steps with respect to the set pump-pulse polarization. An 800 nm (1.55 eV) Ti:Sapphire laser oscillator with a regenerative amplifier at a rep-etition rate of 250 kHz delivers the pulses with a FWHM tpulse duration of 40 fs .Figure 2 a) shows a simplified sketch of the measurement setup. We employ 7a double modulation detection scheme. A photo-elastic crystal modulates the probe beam polarization for MOKE signal detection, and an optical chopper in the pump beam path enhances the temporal MOKE change signal-to-noise ratio after excitation. 

# 2 Discussion a) Twinned       

> d) Single crystal c) Twinned
> f) Topological insulator
> mj= ±3/2
> mj= +1/2 mj= -1/2
> 𝜏 𝑅
> e) spin splitting
> σ-σ+
> b) Single crystal
> σ-σ-
> σ-
> σ+
> σ+
> σ+

Figure 3: Time-resolved complex Kerr angle components data for a) RuO 2 on MgO, and b) RuO 2 on TiO 2 during the first 300 fs after excitation for all three excitation polarizations. The σ± spectra are shifted for clarity; the gray dashed lines represent the original zero line. The circular signal is on average 100 fs faster and 10 times stronger than the linear response. Additionally, a second peak arises. Dynamics data transferred to the complex plane (c) and d)), depicting a butterfly structure, which develops during the femtosecond scattering process between the transient spin polarized states e). Also observed in topological insulators f). Spin dynamics in RuO 2, generated by exciting the electron system with lin-early polarized pulses, are discussed in reference [50]. Therefore, we focus on the dynamics generated using circularly polarized laser pulses. The temporal evolu-tion of ∆θK and ∆ϵK up to ∆τ = 300 fs for a representative sample orientation of 

α = 60 ◦ shows the same features for both RuO 2 samples, as Figs. 3 a) (on MgO) and b) (on TiO 2) depict. A linear pump ( π, blue lines) generates a small demag-netization peak, followed by a remagnetization process on the picosecond (ps) timescale. Both signals ∆θK and ∆ϵK are inverted. The right-circular σ− (orange) and left-circular σ+ (green) pumps generate a temporal evolution, where ∆θK

exhibits a pronounced peak (positive for σ− and negative σ+) followed by a dis-8tinct dip. For ∆ϵK , the sequence and sign between the peak and the dip reverse. Both spectra are shifted for the sake of clarity, with the gray dashed line repre-senting the original zero line. Their trends are not completely independent. They combine the slope of the Gaussian peak with the width of the laser excitation and its derivative, with different amplitudes and signs, in sequence, suggesting a relative time delay between the two components. Nevertheless, the pronounced symmetry of the Kerr response under σ− polarized excitation, together with the negligible reflectivity contribution from the MgO substrate, points to a magnetic origin. Both signals reverse sign upon inversion of the pump helicity. This seemingly complex behavior of a coherently laser-driven ultrafast spin polarization bears a quite simple explanation. Its physical origin is related to se-lection rules and spin-orbit interaction, and thus it is a signature of transient spin-polarized states. This behavior was observed in semiconductors by A. Kimel et. al. [51] and was explained within a simple theoretical model. They investigated the band gaps in intrinsic and n-doped GaAs using time-dependent Kerr spec-troscopy and, based on their findings, developed a model that reveals the micro-scopic processes triggered by the optical pumping on ultrafast timescales. Their calculation of the full complex Kerr angle assumes a simple band model with four energy levels that accounts for spin-split bands arising from spin-orbit interaction in both the ground and the excited states (compare Fig. 3 e)). In such a model, selective pumping processes, assigned by the photon helicity, populate only one of the two possible excited states, thereby creating a transient spin polarization that decays on a characteristic timescale, the Raman coherence time τR. The typ-ical pattern observed in the complex Kerr rotation is interpreted as proof of the existence of spin-polarized bands. Scattering processes, during which excited electrons distribute between different m J states, define τR. Several investigations tested the model on CuO 4 based antiferromagnetic Mott insulators ( τR ≈ 30 −50 fs 

[52]), the multiferroic material YMnO 3 (τR ≈ 10 fs [53]). We have already adapted this method to successfully characterize spin states in the topological insulator 

(BiSb) 2Te 3 (τR ≈ 9 − 15 fs [24]). Using that band model with spin-split bands, an analytic function for the complex Kerr rotation can be derived: 

θK + iϵ K = A exp 



−∆τ 2

w2



+ B exp 

 w2

4τ 2

> R

− ∆τw

  

1 − erf 

 w

2τR

− ∆τw

 

, (1) 9where w = tpulse /p2 ln(2) is the pulse duration, and A, B are the complex am-plitudes arising from the dielectric susceptibility tensor [52, 53]. The first term represents the direct response to laser excitation, indicating a selective pumping process, whereas the second term describes Raman scattering. Fitting eq. 1 to the RuO 2 Kerr dynamics data reveals a τR ≈ 4.5 − 7 fs , which is shorter than for the other material systems, but in the same order of magnitude. Although the Kerr signal changes, τR is independent of the excitation angle. Therefore, we see strong evidence for transient spin-polarized states in RuO 2, optically induced and equilibrating on the femtosecond timescale. In previous studies, the authors applied this model to investigate material systems with spin-split bands, using it as a probe to verify their presence. In Figs. 3 c) and d), the Kerr angle components ∆θK and ∆ϵK are transferred to the complex plane for both samples, RuO 2 grown on MgO and TiO 2, respectively. Finally, Fig. 3 e) illustrates the impact of the quantum mechanical angular momentum conservation law for a simplified RuO 2 band structure in the spin-split Γ − M direction, employing a simple energy level scheme. The selection rules prohibit specific electron transitions, e.g., excitations from the ground state 

mj = 3 /2 by σ+ photons. This prohibition increases the transition probabil-ities from mj̸ = 3 /2 states relative to transitions induced by π-polarized pho-tons. A similar effect is discussed in reference [24], where ultrafast spin dynamics in topological insulators is explained, based on a two-level band model. Both material systems have one thing in common: increased photon densities, as are concentrated in femtosecond laser pulses, enhance higher-order excitation prob-abilities, leading to demagnetization effects. For first-order excitations, however, the photons induce coherent, spin-polarized states that scatter on a femtosecond timescale. The crucial difference between the two systems is that RuO 2 is not spin-split along the Γ − Z direction, and we do not expect a distinct pumping behavior with respect to opposite helicities. Additionally, in topological insula-tors, scattering processes are always associated with a reversal of the ⃗ k direction upon a spin flip, due to spin-momentum locking. In RuO 2, the symmetry of the electron band associates a spin flip with a direction change of ⃗ k by 90 ◦. Both processes result in a similar relation between ∆θK and ∆ϵK , forming butterfly structures, see Figs. 3 c), d) for RuO 2 and f) for a topological insulator (adapted from [24]). 10 Density functional theory calculations predict two crystalline directions for spin-split bands in rutile RuO 2 single crystals that are perpendicular to each other and occupied by electrons with opposite spin [49]. These spin-split bands in d-orbitals form along the long tetragonal axes, as illustrated in Figs. 2 b) and c). With respect to the (110) plane, one of those spin-split bands is oriented in-plane, while the second band lies perpendicular to the (110) plane, out-of-plane. We ex-pect an angle-dependent spin-dynamics signal from the in-plane-oriented band, while the signal from the out-of-plane band should be angle-independent. It is reasonable to assume α = 180 ◦ periodicity of the spin polarization, mirrored in ∆θK , and therefore a strong response along the in-plane, spin-split direction (135 ◦), and a vanishing signal along the perpendicularly oriented in-plane axis (45 ◦) where no splitting occurs. The out-of-plane spin-split bands retain their ori-entation relative to the incoming photons during sample rotation. This induces a constant signal, either positive or negative, depending on the light’s helicity. The superposition of both signals (in-plane and out-of-plane) generates an oscillating pattern ∝ sin 2(x) with a non-vanishing constant sign amplitude. Given these considerations, we conduct a systematic angle-dependent study of the spin dynamics of our samples. We rotate the samples around the [110] direction axis by angle α, as described in Fig. 2 a) (blue arrow) and b) - c). Figs. 4 a)-c) present the time-resolved Kerr rotation dynamics ( ∆θK ) for selected sample rotation angles α from 75 ◦ to 255 ◦, up to ∆τ = 1 ps for the RuO 2 thin film grown on MgO, employing right circularly σ−, linearly π and left circularly σ+ polarized laser pulses. The Kerr response is qualitatively similar, regardless of excitation polarization. The magneto-optical response peaks upon the arrival of the pump pulse and relaxes on a picosecond timescale. However, two aspects stand out. First, ( σ±) pulses generate tenfold larger Kerr signals, and these emerge ∼ 100 fs 

earlier than those generated by ( π) pulses. Second, σ+ and σ− pulses generate Kerr dynamics of opposite sign at ultrashort delays ( ∆τ < 100 fs ). The absolute amplitude of the transient ∆θK peak increases as α increases from 75 ◦ to 135 ◦,reaches a plateau around α ≈ 150 ◦, and subsequently decreases to a minimum at 

α ≈ 255 ◦.Those peak amplitudes for a full rotation are extracted in Fig. 4 d) for RuO 2

grown on the MgO substrate. They exhibit identical periodic angular dependen-cies with pronounced twofold symmetry across all pump polarizations. For a 11 d) Twinned 

> g) Single crystal - 60°
> e) Single crystal - shifted
> h) Single crystal - 135°
> f) Twinned

σ-

σ-

σ+

σ+Figure 4: RuO 2 on MgO: ∆θK spectra for an a) left circular, b) linear, and c) right circular polarized excitation during the first 1 ps after excitation for selected sam-ple rotation angles. d) and e), the first peak extracted from the corresponding dynamic curves for RuO 2 on MgO (twinned) and TiO 2 (single crystal), respec-tively, plotted as a function of sample rotation angle α. The data show a clear twofold symmetry for a full sample rotation. The single-crystal data are shifted for clarity, with dashed lines denoting the zero-crossing. In the complex plane, f) twinned and g), h) single crystal, the butterfly structure is shown for both sam-ples. In g) and h), the ”switching” behavior shows in the sign change between the wings from α = 60 ◦ and α = 135 ◦.single-crystalline rutile structure, we expect a pattern ∼ sin 2(α) in the extracted peak amplitudes as a function of the rotation angle α. However, additional sym-metry aspects shift this pattern from the zero line. First, the lattice mismatch between the cubic MgO substrate and the tetragonal RuO 2 causes a crystal twin-ning, forcing the deposited material into two crystal sub-systems rotated by 90 ◦.Additionally, they do not develop a well-defined N´ eel vector direction. From 12 the perspective of the substrate, the RuO 2 crystals grow rotated by ±45 ◦ against the [100] MgO direction, allowing two opposite N´ eel vector directions for each sub-crystal system. This allows for four possible magnetic ordering directions in 

20 − 30 nm long, 5 − 10 nm wide, spatially separated, grain-like crystals with a 1:1 distribution. The probe beam spot covers an area Aprobe ≈ 350 μm2, which is much smaller than the pump spot size Apump ≈ 11000 μm2. That means we excite and probe thousands of grains, recording a superposition of n Kerr sig-nals ∆θSK , ∆ϵSK ∝ P 

> n

an · sin 2(α − αoffset ,n), generated at crystal evenly distributed crystal sub-systems. For such a distribution, an = 1 or an = −1 represent the two possible N´ eel vector directions and magnitudes, and αoffset ,n = ±45 ◦ represents the two crystal twins. Such a configuration would result in a signal ∆θSK , ∆ϵSK

independent of the sample rotation, which we do not measure. Asymmetries in the sub-crystal system do not account for the uneven distri-bution of the N´ eel vectors, because X-ray diffraction crystallography reveals an almost perfect parity between the crystal twin distributions, with a very small variation < 1% . However, small magnetic fields, always present during crys-tal growth, can bias the direction of the N´ eel vector. Accordingly, one of the four possible N´ eel vectors may dominate the signal and lead to an angle depen-dence. This results in a non-vanishing amplitude, following the ∼ sin 2(α) pattern shifted from zero. This behavior resembles the inflating and deflating ”butterfly” pattern in the complex plane, shown in Fig. 4 f). Their shape demonstrates an angle dependence for ∆θK , indicating the strength of the induced transient spin-polarized state. At the same time, ∆ϵK remains almost constant throughout the sample rotation, implying that electrons are pumped into bands with the same orbital momentum independent of the excitation vector. We explain the small Kerr signal amplitudes and missing second oscillation peak measured for π polarized excitation on both substrates by considering linear polarization as a superposition of σ+ and σ− polarizations. In that case, all elec-tron bands are excited equally, limiting a distinct spin-separated response. We attribute the remaining magnetic response signal to long-lived spin-polarization, as discussed in reference [50], which seems also present in the (110) crystal struc-ture, in which one sublattice band structure is oriented in-plane, and the other is oriented out-of-plane. Noticeably, we observe a sign change in the RuO 2 sample grown on TiO 2.13 Fig.4 e) shows the extracted Kerr signal peak amplitudes plotted as a function of the sample rotation angle α for a full rotation, analogously to the data in Fig. 4 d) (data are shifted for clarity, the gray dashed lines represent zero crossing, orange/green are the σ−/σ + excitation data). The data follow a pattern similar to that for RuO 2 grown on MgO, but instead of a trend ∼ sin 2(α), a much sharper step-like switching occurs. In addition, each sample rotation by α = 90 ◦ induces a polarization sign change, see Figs. 4 g) and h). In conclusion, our data confirm that ultrashort circularly polarized laser pulses induce short-lived magnetically polarized states in RuO 2, and we can control their polarity by reversing the helicity of the pump pulse and changing the crys-tal orientation. We demonstrate the existence of transient spin-polarized states by analyzing the characteristic relation between both Kerr-angle components mea-sured as a dynamic response to excitation by ultrashort laser pulses, resulting in a ”butterfly” structure. This analysis enables us to establish a link between the findings for RuO 2 crystals and materials with spin-split bands, e.g., topological insulators. The extracted Raman scattering time τR < 10 fs after which the spin polarization decays denotes the lifetime of the spin-separated states. The strength of polarization changes with the crystalline direction of the sample, according to the symmetries of the proposed spin-split bands of the crystal [49]. Consequently, this new non-contact method can be used to characterize altermagnets fast and without destroying the sample properties. Excitation by linearly polarized pho-tons does not occupy spin-separated states above the Fermi level selectively, re-sulting in a Kerr signal that is one order of magnitude smaller. Finally, excita-tion by circularly polarized photons enables us to generate controlled, coherent transient spin-polarized states driven by polarized light pulses on an ultrafast timescale. 

# References 

[1] Felix Oberbauer, Tristan Joachim Winkel, Tim B ¨ ohnert, Clara C. Wan-jura, Marcel S. Claro, Luana Benetti, Ihsan C ¸ aha, Francis Leonard Deepak, Farshad Moradi, Ricardo Ferreira, Markus M ¨ unzenberg, and Tahereh Sa-dat Parvini. Magnetic tunnel junctions driven by hybrid optical-electrical 14 signals as a flexible neuromorphic computing platform. Communications Physics , 8(1), August 2025. [2] Libor ˇ Smejkal, Rafael Gonz´ alez-Hern´ andez, T. Jungwirth, and J. Sinova. Crystal time-reversal symmetry breaking and spontaneous Hall effect in collinear antiferromagnets. Science Advances , 6(23):eaaz8809, June 2020. [3] Libor ˇ Smejkal, Jairo Sinova, and Tomas Jungwirth. Emerging Research Landscape of Altermagnetism. Physical Review X , 12(4):040501, December 2022. [4] Libor ˇ Smejkal, Jairo Sinova, and Tomas Jungwirth. Beyond Conventional Ferromagnetism and Antiferromagnetism: A Phase with Nonrelativistic Spin and Crystal Rotation Symmetry. Physical Review X , 12(3):031042, September 2022. [5] Tom´ aˇ s Jungwirth, Rafael M. Fernandes, Eduardo Fradkin, Allan H. Mac-Donald, Jairo Sinova, and Libor ˇ Smejkal. Altermagnetism: An unconven-tional spin-ordered phase of matter. Newton , 1(6):100162, August 2025. [6] T. Jungwirth, J. Sinova, P. Wadley, D. Kriegner, H. Reichlova, F. Krizek, H. Ohno, and L. Smejkal. Altermagnetic spintronics, 2025. Version Num-ber: 1. [7] Helena Reichlova, Rafael Lopes Seeger, Rafael Gonz´ alez-Hern´ andez, Ismaila Kounta, Richard Schlitz, Dominik Kriegner, Philipp Ritzinger, Michaela Lammel, Miina Leivisk¨ a, Anna Birk Hellenes, Kamil Olejn´ ık, Vaclav Petˇ riˇ cek, Petr Doleˇ zal, Lukas Horak, Eva Schmoranzerova, Anton´ ın Badura, Sylvain Bertaina, Andy Thomas, Vincent Baltz, Lisa Michez, Jairo Sinova, Sebastian T. B. Goennenwein, Tom´ aˇ s Jungwirth, and Libor ˇ Smejkal. Ob-servation of a spontaneous anomalous Hall response in the Mn 5Si 3 d-wave altermagnet candidate. Nature Communications , 15(1):4961, June 2024. [8] Anton´ ın Badura, Warlley H. Campos, Venkata K. Bharadwaj, Isma¨ ıla Kounta, Lisa Michez, Matthieu Petit, Javier Rial, Miina Leivisk¨ a, Vincent Baltz, Filip Krizek, Dominik Kriegner, Jakub ˇ Zelezn ´ y, Jan Zemen, Sjoerd Telkamp, Sebastian Sailler, Michaela Lammel, Rodrigo Jaeschke-Ubiergo, 15 Anna Birk Hellenes, Rafael Gonz´ alez-Hern´ andez, Jairo Sinova, Tom´ aˇ s Jung-wirth, Sebastian T. B. Goennenwein, Libor ˇ Smejkal, and Helena Reichlova. Observation of the anomalous Nernst effect in altermagnetic candidate Mn 5Si 3. Nature Communications , 16(1):7111, August 2025. [9] Lei Han, Xizhi Fu, Rui Peng, Xingkai Cheng, Jiankun Dai, Liangyang Liu, Yidian Li, Yichi Zhang, Wenxuan Zhu, Hua Bai, Yongjian Zhou, Shixuan Liang, Chong Chen, Qian Wang, Xianzhe Chen, Luyi Yang, Yang Zhang, Cheng Song, Junwei Liu, and Feng Pan. Electrical 180° switching of N´ eel vector in spin-splitting antiferromagnet. Science Advances , 10(4):eadn0479, January 2024. [10] Sayantika Bhowal and Nicola A. Spaldin. Ferroically Ordered Magnetic Oc-tupoles in d -Wave Altermagnets. Physical Review X , 14(1):011019, February 2024. [11] Quentin Faure, Dalila Bounoua, Victor Bal´ edent, Arsen Gukasov, V. Ovidiu Garlea, Afonso Ribeiro, Jeffrey G. Rau, Sylvain Petit, and Paul McClarty. Al-termagnetism revealed by polarized neutrons in MnF 2, 2025. Version Num-ber: 1. [12] D. Kriegner, H. Reichlova, J. Grenzer, W. Schmidt, E. Ressouche, J. Godinho, T. Wagner, S. Y. Martin, A. B. Shick, V. V. Volobuev, G. Springholz, V. Hol ´ y, J. Wunderlich, T. Jungwirth, and K. V ´ yborn ´ y. Magnetic anisotropy in anti-ferromagnetic hexagonal MnTe. Physical Review B , 96(21):214418, December 2017. [13] R. D. Gonzalez Betancourt, J. Zub´ aˇ c, R. Gonzalez-Hernandez, K. Geishen-dorf, Z. ˇ Sob´ a ˇ n, G. Springholz, K. Olejn´ ık, L. ˇ Smejkal, J. Sinova, T. Jungwirth, S. T. B. Goennenwein, A. Thomas, H. Reichlov´ a, J. ˇ Zelezn ´ y, and D. Krieg-ner. Spontaneous Anomalous Hall Effect Arising from an Unconventional Compensated Magnetic Phase in a Semiconductor. Physical Review Letters ,130(3):036702, January 2023. [14] I. I. Mazin. Altermagnetism in MnTe: Origin, predicted manifestations, and routes to detwinning. Physical Review B , 107(10):L100418, March 2023. 16 [15] J. Krempask ´ y, L. ˇSmejkal, S. W. D’Souza, M. Hajlaoui, G. Springholz, K. Uhl´ ıˇ rov´ a, F. Alarab, P. C. Constantinou, V. Strocov, D. Usanov, W. R. Pudelko, R. Gonz´ alez-Hern´ andez, A. Birk Hellenes, Z. Jansa, H. Reichlov´ a, Z. ˇ Sob´ a ˇ n, R. D. Gonzalez Betancourt, P. Wadley, J. Sinova, D. Kriegner, J. Min´ ar, J. H. Dil, and T. Jungwirth. Altermagnetic lifting of Kramers spin degeneracy. Nature , 626(7999):517–522, February 2024. [16] O. J. Amin, A. Dal Din, E. Golias, Y. Niu, A. Zakharov, S. C. Fromage, C. J. B. Fields, S. L. Heywood, R. B. Cousins, F. Maccherozzi, J. Krempask ´ y, J. H. Dil, D. Kriegner, B. Kiraly, R. P. Campion, A. W. Rushforth, K. W. Edmonds, S. S. Dhesi, L. ˇ Smejkal, T. Jungwirth, and P. Wadley. Nanoscale imaging and control of altermagnetism in MnTe. Nature , 636(8042):348–353, December 2024. [17] T. Osumi, S. Souma, T. Aoyama, K. Yamauchi, A. Honma, K. Nakayama, T. Takahashi, K. Ohgushi, and T. Sato. Observation of a giant band splitting in altermagnetic MnTe. Physical Review B , 109(11):115102, March 2024. [18] Sonka Reimers, Lukas Odenbreit, Libor ˇ Smejkal, Vladimir N. Strocov, Pro-copios Constantinou, Anna B. Hellenes, Rodrigo Jaeschke Ubiergo, Warl-ley H. Campos, Venkata K. Bharadwaj, Atasi Chakraborty, Thibaud Den-neulin, Wen Shi, Rafal E. Dunin-Borkowski, Suvadip Das, Mathias Kl¨ aui, Jairo Sinova, and Martin Jourdan. Direct observation of altermagnetic band splitting in CrSb thin films. Nature Communications , 15(1):2116, March 2024. [19] Jianyang Ding, Zhicheng Jiang, Xiuhua Chen, Zicheng Tao, Zhengtai Liu, Tongrui Li, Jishan Liu, Jianping Sun, Jinguang Cheng, Jiayu Liu, Yichen Yang, Runfeng Zhang, Liwei Deng, Wenchuan Jing, Yu Huang, Yuming Shi, Mao Ye, Shan Qiao, Yilin Wang, Yanfeng Guo, Donglai Feng, and Dawei Shen. Large Band Splitting in g -Wave Altermagnet CrSb. Physical Review Letters , 133(20):206401, November 2024. [20] Rhea Hoyer, P. Peter Stavropoulos, Aleksandar Razpopov, Roser Valent´ ı, Li-bor ˇ Smejkal, and Alexander Mook. Altermagnetic splitting of magnons in hematite α - Fe 2 O3. Physical Review B , 112(6):064425, August 2025. 17 [21] Edgar Galindez-Ruales, Rafael Gonzalez-Hernandez, Christin Schmitt, Shubhankar Das, Felix Fuhrmann, Andrew Ross, Evangelos Golias, Akashdeep Akashdeep, Laura L ¨ unenb ¨ urger, Eunchong Baek, Wanting Yang, Libor ˇ Smejkal, Venkata Krishna, Rodrigo Jaeschke-Ubiergo, Jairo Sinova, Avner Rothschild, Chun-Yeol You, Gerhard Jakob, and Mathias Kl¨ aui. Re-vealing the Altermagnetism in Hematite via XMCD Imaging and Anoma-lous Hall Electrical Transport. Advanced Materials , 37(41):e05019, October 2025. [22] Georg M. M ¨ uller, Jakob Walowski, Marija Djordjevic, Gou-Xing Miao, Arunava Gupta, Ana V. Ramos, Kai Gehrke, Vasily Moshnyaga, Konrad Samwer, Jan Schmalhorst, Andy Thomas, Andreas H ¨ utten, G ¨ unter Reiss, Jagadeesh S. Moodera, and Markus M ¨ unzenberg. Spin polarization in half-metals probed by femtosecond spin excitation. Nature Materials , 8(1):56–61, January 2009. [23] Michel Fruchart and David Carpentier. An introduction to topological insu-lators. Comptes Rendus. Physique , 14(9-10):779–815, October 2013. [24] F. Boschini, M. Mansurova, G. Mussler, J. Kampmeier, D. Gr ¨ utzmacher, L. Braun, F. Katmis, J. S. Moodera, C. Dallera, E. Carpene, C. Franz, M. Cz-erner, C. Heiliger, T. Kampfrath, and M. M ¨ unzenberg. Coherent ultrafast spin-dynamics probed in three dimensional topological insulators. Scientific Reports , 5(1):15304, October 2015. [25] Jean-Yves Bigot, Mircea Vomir, and Eric Beaurepaire. Coherent ultrafast magnetism induced by femtosecond laser pulses. Nature Physics , 5(7):515– 520, July 2009. [26] J. Walowski, G. M ¨ uller, M. Djordjevic, M. M ¨ unzenberg, M. Kl¨ aui, C. A. F. Vaz, and J. A. C. Bland. Energy Equilibration Processes of Electrons, Magnons, and Phonons at the Femtosecond Time Scale. Physical Review Let-ters , 101(23):237401, December 2008. [27] P. Wadley, B. Howells, J. ˇZelezn ´ y, C. Andrews, V. Hills, R. P. Campion, V. Nov´ ak, K. Olejn´ ık, F. Maccherozzi, S. S. Dhesi, S. Y. Martin, T. Wagner, J. Wunderlich, F. Freimuth, Y. Mokrousov, J. Kuneˇ s, J. S. Chauhan, M. J. 18 Grzybowski, A. W. Rushforth, K. W. Edmonds, B. L. Gallagher, and T. Jung-wirth. Electrical switching of an antiferromagnet. Science , 351(6273):587–590, February 2016. [28] Andriy Smolyanyuk, Igor I. Mazin, Laura Garcia-Gassull, and Roser Valent´ ı. Fragility of the magnetic order in the prototypical altermagnet RuO 2. Physi-cal Review B , 109(13):134424, April 2024. [29] Philipp Keßler, Laura Garcia-Gassull, Andreas Suter, Thomas Prokscha, Za-her Salman, Dmitry Khalyavin, Pascal Manuel, Fabio Orlandi, Igor I. Mazin, Roser Valent´ ı, and Simon Moser. Absence of magnetic order in RuO 2:insights from μSR spectroscopy and neutron diffraction. npj Spintronics ,2(1):50, October 2024. [30] M. Hiraishi, H. Okabe, A. Koda, R. Kadono, T. Muroi, D. Hirai, and Z. Hi-roi. Nonmagnetic Ground State in RuO 2 Revealed by Muon Spin Rotation. 

Physical Review Letters , 132(16):166702, April 2024. [31] David T. Plouff, Laura Scheuer, Shreya Shrestha, Weipeng Wu, Naw-sher J. Parvez, Subhash Bhatt, Xinhao Wang, Lars Gundlach, M. Benjamin Jungfleisch, and John Q. Xiao. Revisiting altermagnetism in RuO 2: a study of laser-pulse induced charge dynamics by time-domain terahertz spec-troscopy. npj Spintronics , 3(1):17, May 2025. [32] Jiayu Liu, Jie Zhan, Tongrui Li, Jishan Liu, Shufan Cheng, Yuming Shi, Li-wei Deng, Meng Zhang, Chihao Li, Jianyang Ding, Qi Jiang, Mao Ye, Zheng-tai Liu, Zhicheng Jiang, Siyu Wang, Qian Li, Yanwu Xie, Yilin Wang, Shan Qiao, Jinsheng Wen, Yan Sun, and Dawei Shen. Absence of Altermag-netic Spin Splitting Character in Rutile Oxide RuO 2. Physical Review Letters ,133(17):176401, October 2024. [33] L Kiefer, F Wirth, A Bertin, P Becker, L Bohat ´ y, K Schmalzl, A Stunault, J A Rodr´ ıguez-Velamazan, O Fabelo, and M Braden. Crystal structure and absence of magnetic order in single-crystalline RuO 2. Journal of Physics: Con-densed Matter , 37(13):135801, March 2025. 19 [34] Jiabin Song, Chao Mu, Shilin Zhu, Xuebo Zhou, Wei Wu, Yun-ze Long, Jian-lin Luo, and Zheng Li. Absence of magnetic order and magnetic fluctuations in RuO 2. Physical Review B , 112(14):144444, October 2025. [35] Yu-Chun Wang, Zhe-Yu Shen, Chia-Hsi Lin, Wei-Chih Hsu, You-Sheng Chen, Yi-Ying Chin, Akhilesh Kr. Singh, Wei-Li Lee, Chien-Te Chen, Ssu-Yen Huang, and Danru Qu. Absence of Transport Altermagnetic Spin-Splitting Effect in RuO 2. Nano Letters , 26(7):2548–2554, February 2026. [36] Zexin Feng, Xiaorong Zhou, Libor ˇ Smejkal, Lei Wu, Zengwei Zhu, Huixin Guo, Rafael Gonz´ alez-Hern´ andez, Xiaoning Wang, Han Yan, Peixin Qin, Xin Zhang, Haojiang Wu, Hongyu Chen, Ziang Meng, Li Liu, Zhengcai Xia, Jairo Sinova, Tom´ aˇ s Jungwirth, and Zhiqi Liu. An anomalous Hall effect in alter-magnetic ruthenium dioxide. Nature Electronics , 5(11):735–743, November 2022. [37] Teresa Tschirner, Philipp Keßler, Ruben Dario Gonzalez Betancourt, Tommy Kotte, Dominik Kriegner, Bernd B ¨ uchner, Joseph Dufouleur, Martin Kamp, Vedran Jovic, Libor Smejkal, Jairo Sinova, Ralph Claessen, Tomas Jungwirth, Simon Moser, Helena Reichlova, and Louis Veyrat. Saturation of the anoma-lous Hall effect at high magnetic fields in altermagnetic RuO 2. APL Materials ,11(10):101103, October 2023. [38] Arnab Bose, Nathaniel J. Schreiber, Rakshit Jain, Ding-Fu Shao, Hari P. Nair, Jiaxin Sun, Xiyue S. Zhang, David A. Muller, Evgeny Y. Tsymbal, Darrell G. Schlom, and Daniel C. Ralph. Tilted spin current generated by the collinear antiferromagnet ruthenium dioxide. Nature Electronics , 5(5):267–274, May 2022. [39] Shutaro Karube, Takahiro Tanaka, Daichi Sugawara, Naohiro Kadoguchi, Makoto Kohda, and Junsaku Nitta. Observation of Spin-Splitter Torque in Collinear Antiferromagnetic RuO 2. Physical Review Letters , 129(13):137201, September 2022. [40] H. Bai, L. Han, X. Y. Feng, Y. J. Zhou, R. X. Su, Q. Wang, L. Y. Liao, W. X. Zhu, X. Z. Chen, F. Pan, X. L. Fan, and C. Song. Observation of Spin Split-20 ting Torque in a Collinear Antiferromagnet RuO 2. Physical Review Letters ,128(19):197202, May 2022. [41] Yichi Zhang, Hua Bai, Jiankun Dai, Lei Han, Chong Chen, Shixuan Liang, Yanzhang Cao, Yingying Zhang, Qian Wang, Wenxuan Zhu, Feng Pan, and Cheng Song. Electrical manipulation of spin splitting torque in altermag-netic RuO 2. Nature Communications , 16(1):5646, July 2025. [42] Olena Fedchenko, Jan Min´ ar, Akashdeep Akashdeep, Sunil Wilfred D’Souza, Dmitry Vasilyev, Olena Tkach, Lukas Odenbreit, Quynh Nguyen, Dmytro Kutnyakhov, Nils Wind, Lukas Wenthaus, Markus Scholz, Kai Ross-nagel, Moritz Hoesch, Martin Aeschlimann, Benjamin Stadtm ¨ uller, Mathias Kl¨ aui, Gerd Sch ¨ onhense, Tomas Jungwirth, Anna Birk Hellenes, Gerhard Jakob, Libor ˇ Smejkal, Jairo Sinova, and Hans-Joachim Elmers. Observation of time-reversal symmetry breaking in the band structure of altermagnetic RuO 2. Science Advances , 10(5):eadj4883, February 2024. [43] Y. Lytvynenko, A. Akashdeep, T. P. Vo, O. Tkach, S. V. Chernov, A. Gloskovskii, C. Schlueter, C. Luo, V. Ukleev, F. Radu, F. Kronast, T. Hi-roto, A. Winkelmann, J. Min´ ar, M. Kl¨ aui, G. Sch ¨ onhense, G. Jakob, H. J. Elmers, and O. Fedchenko. Magnetic circular dichroism in core-level x-ray photoelectron spectroscopy of altermagnetic RuO 2 films. Physical Review B ,113(1):014403, January 2026. [44] J. Jechumt´ al, O. Gueckstock, K. Jasensk ´ y, Z. Kaˇ spar, K Olejn´ ık, M. Gaerner, G. Reiss, S. Moser, P. Kessler, G. De Luca, S. Ganguly, J. Santiso, D. Schef-fler, J. Z´ azvorka, P. Kubaˇ sˇ c´ ık, H. Reichlova, E. Schmoranzerova, P. Nˇ emec, T. Jungwirth, P. Kuˇ zel, T. Kampfrath, and L. N´ advorn´ ık. Spin-to-charge-current conversion in altermagnetic candidate RuO 2 probed by terahertz emission spectroscopy, 2025. arXiv:2508.11481 [cond-mat]. [45] Samy Brahimi, Dibya Prakash Rai, and Samir Lounis. Confinement-induced altermagnetism in RuO 2 ultrathin films. Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter ,37(39):395801, September 2025. [46] Markus Meinert. A meta-GGA perspective on the altermagnetism of RuO 2,December 2025. arXiv:2512.04995 [cond-mat]. 21 [47] Markus Meinert. Neel temperature and helical spin order of altermagnetic RuO 2, February 2026. arXiv:2602.15606 [cond-mat]. [48] Akashdeep Akashdeep, Sachin Krishnia, Jae-Hyun Ha, Siyeon An, Maik Gaerner, Thomas Prokscha, Andreas Suter, Gianluca Janka, G ¨ unter Reiss, Timo Kuschel, Dong-Soo Han, Angelo Di Bernardo, Zaher Salman, Ger-hard Jakob, and Mathias Kl¨ aui. Surface-localized magnetic order in RuO 2

thin films revealed by low-energy muon probes. Applied Physics Letters ,128(2):022406, January 2026. [49] Takumi Osumi, Kunihiko Yamauchi, Seigo Souma, Shubhankar Paul, Asuka Honma, Kosuke Nakayama, Kenichi Ozawa, Miho Kitamura, Koji Horiba, Hiroshi Kumigashira, Chiara Bigi, Franc ¸ois Bertran, Tamio Oguchi, Takashi Takahashi, Yoshiteru Maeno, and Takafumi Sato. Spin-degenerate bulk bands and topological surface states associated with Dirac nodal lines in RuO 2. Physical Review B , 113(8):085116, February 2026. [50] Marius Weber, Stephan Wust, Luca Haag, Akashdeep Akashdeep, Kai Leck-ron, Christin Schmitt, Rafael Ramos, Takashi Kikkawa, Eiji Saitoh, Math-ias Kl¨ aui, Libor ˇ Smejkal, Jairo Sinova, Martin Aeschlimann, Gerhard Jakob, Benjamin Stadtm ¨ uller, and Hans Christian Schneider. All optical excitation of spin polarization in d-wave altermagnets, August 2024. arXiv:2408.05187 [cond-mat]. [51] A. V. Kimel, F. Bentivegna, V. N. Gridnev, V. V. Pavlov, R. V. Pisarev, and Th. Rasing. Room-temperature ultrafast carrier and spin dynamics in GaAs probed by the photoinduced magneto-optical Kerr effect. Physical Review B ,63(23):235201, May 2001. [52] V. V. Pavlov, R. V. Pisarev, V. N. Gridnev, E. A. Zhukov, D. R. Yakovlev, and M. Bayer. Ultrafast Optical Pumping of Spin and Orbital Polarizations in the Antiferromagnetic Mott Insulators R 2CuO 4. Physical Review Letters ,98(4):047403, January 2007. [53] M. Pohl, V. V. Pavlov, I. A. Akimov, V. N. Gridnev, R. V. Pisarev, D. R. Yakovlev, and M. Bayer. Ultrafast photoinduced linear and circular optical 22 anisotropy in the multiferroic hexagonal manganite YMnO 3. Physical Review B, 88(19):195112, November 2013. [54] M. Bj ¨ orck and G. Andersson. Genx: an extensible x-ray reflectivity refine-ment program utilizing differential evolution. Journal of Applied Crystallogra-phy , 40, 2007. 

# 3 Supplementary 

# 3.1 Sample preparation a) b) c) d) 

Figure 5: a) and b) X-ray diffraction spectra for both samples grown on MgO and TiO 2, respectively. c) and d) X-ray reflectivity spectra for both samples grown on MgO and TiO 2, respectively. The RuO 2 layers are grown by reactive RF-magnetron sputtering using an Ar:O 2 ratio of 4:1 in a UHV chamber with a base pressure below 1 · 10 −9 mbar. The RuO 2 layer is deposited onto MgO(001) and TiO 2(110) substrates at substrate temperatures ≈ 230 ◦C. The Pt capping is deposited in-situ at room tempera-ture by DC-magnetron sputtering. The samples are then characterized by X-ray diffraction (XRD) and X-ray reflectivity (XRR) in a PANalytical X’Pert Pro MPD PW3040-60 diffractometer using Cu K α radiation. RuO 2(ll0) peaks appear after deposition on both substrates, as illustrated in Figs. 5 a) and b). In both cases, the 23 Pt-capping is (111) textured with pronounced Laue Oscillations. XRR measure-ments for samples grown on MgO(001) and TiO 2(110) are shown in Figs. 5 c) and d), respectively. Layer thicknesses d and roughnesses σ are determined using the open-source software GenX [54] and are presented in the Tab. 1. Table 1: Sample parameters. sample grown on MgO(001) sample grown on TiO 2(110) layer d [nm] σ [nm] layer d [nm] σ [nm] Pt 3.5 0.6 Pt 3.6 0.6 RuO 2 19.8 0.5 RuO 2 18.0 0.5 MgO - 0.5 MgO - 0.6 24