Title: 2603.22830v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.22830v1

Published Time: Wed, 25 Mar 2026 00:40:38 GMT

Number of Pages: 13

Markdown Content:
Profound impacts of interlayer interactions in bilayer altermagnet ic V2S2O

Siqi Xu 1, Qilong Cui 1, Shaowen Xu 2, Xianbo Chenwei 1, Jiahao Zhang 1, Ruixue Li 1,

Yuan Li 1, Gaofeng Xu 1†, and Fanhao Jia 1*    

> 1Department of Physics, Hangzhou Dianzi University , Hangzhou 310018, China
> 2School of Physics and Optoelectronic Engineering, Hangzhou Institute for Advanced Study,
> University of Chinese Academy of Sciences , Hangzhou 310024, China
> *Contact author: fanhaojia@hdu.edu .cn
> †Contact author: xug@hdu.edu.cn

ABSTRACT 

Two -dimensional altermagnets exhibit exceptional potential for low -power spintronics 

via nonrelativistic spin splitting and zero net magnetization. Here, we systematically 

investigate the influence of interlayer interactions on the electronic, magnetic and 

quantum transport properties of bilayer vanadium oxysulfide (V 2S2O) — a prototypical 

layered altermagnet — using density functional theory and non -equilibrium Green’s 

function calculations. Our results reveal that i nterlayer interactions predominantly 

modulate the p -orbital derived top valence bands, inducing a profound competitive 

valence band maximum position between Γ-point p z and X/Y -point p xy orbitals , with an 

energy difference as small as 9 meV. Furthermore, i nterlayer interactions suppress the 

piezomagnetic effect and impose additional requirements on the type of strain for the 

bilayer system , compared to its monolayer counterpart. Out -of -plane external electric 

fields effectively weaken interlayer coupling by enlarging the energy difference of Γ/ X-

Y top valence bands to 170 me V. Quantum transport simulations on a bilayer 

Au/ V2S2O/Au two -probe device demonstrate the presence of pronounced spin current .

Interlayer interactions reduc e the transmission spin polarization from nearly 100% 

(monolayer) to ~60% (bilayer) for energ ies above the Fermi level . Notably, gate -

voltage modulation exhibits significant asymmetry in controlling charge -to -spin 

current conversion efficiency, originating from the out -of -plane symmetry breaking 

induced by the electrode geometry. Specifically, a positive gate voltage markedly 

enhance s the contribution of the bottom layer to the overall spin polarization, while a 

negative gate voltage induces a marginal reduction of transmission spin polarization, 

attributed to the inherently weak polarizat ion contribution of the bottom layer . These 

findings provide essential insights for the design and optimization of multilayer 

altermagnetic spintronic s.

Keywords: 2D altermagnetism ; spin -valley locking; interlayer interaction; strain 

engineering; electric field modulation; quantum transport TOC figure 

The long -standing pursuit of low -power, highly integrated spintronic devices has driven 

the search for magnetic materials that transcend the limitations of conventional 

ferromagnets and antiferromagnets 1-3. Ferromagnets enable spin polarization but are 

constrained by inherent stray fields that limit miniaturization and integration. 

Antiferromagnets, by contrast, allow for miniaturization and fast, low -power operation; 

however, the intrinsic spin splitting ess ential for efficient spin transport is absent 4.

Altermagnetism, an emerging collinear magnetic order characterized by momentum -

dependent nonrelativistic spin splitting and zero macroscopic magnetization, has 

emerged as a game -changing solution to this dilemma 5-7. By breaking combined Parity -

Time symmetry without net magnetic moment, altermagnets combine the functional 

advantages of ferromagnets (spin -polarized transport) with the stability of 

antiferromagnets (no stray fields) 8, making them ideal candidates for next -generation 

spintronics 9-11 .

Layered two -dimensional (2D) altermagnets have attracted particular attention due 

to their exceptional tunability and compatibility with nanoscale device architectures 12 -

> 13

. Classic theoretical studies established that altermagneti c spin splitting arises from 

symmetry breaking and crystal rotational symmetry coupling between spin sublattices, 

rather than spin -orbit coupling or net magnetization 7. Experimental breakthroughs, 

such as the observation of giant spin splitting in CrSb thin films 14 and anomalous Hall 

effect in RuO 2 15 , have validated the potential of altermagnets in spintronic applications. 

Recent advances further demonstrate that layered altermagnets can achieve remarkable 

device performance: for instance, KV 2Se 2O-based 16 -17 altermagnetic tunnel junctions 

exhibit tunnel magnetoresistance ratio exceeding 10 3% 18 , far surpassing traditional 

ferromagnetic tunnel junctions 19 -20 . Additionally, altermagnet -topological 

superconductor heterostructures have been theoretically predicted to support quantized 

crossed Andreev reflection 21 , opening avenues for topological quantum computing in 

zero magnetic fields 22 .

Despite these progresses, critical gaps remain in understanding layered 

altermagnets, especially in multilayer systems where interlayer interactions introduce new degrees of freedom 23 -24 . Monolayer altermagnets , such as V2S2O, have been 

shown to exhibit giant spin splitting and spin -valley locking, with spin transport 

properties dominated by orbital -selective contributions from p and d orbitals 13 .

However, transition from monolayers to bilayers —an essential step for device 

fabrication —introduces interlayer coupling effects that can drastically reshape 

electronic structure and transport behavior 25 . While external stimuli such as strain 26 

and electric fields 27 serve as effective tools for tailoring 2D materials —e.g., breaking 

valley degeneracy and enhancing piezomagnetic effects 28 -29 in monolayers via strain, 

or inducing Stark shifts and symmetry breaking via electric fields —their impact in 

bilayer systems remains less clear due to the specific role of interlayer coupling. 

Previous studies on related layered magnets suggest that interlayer interactions can 

modulate band alignment , crystal symmetry 30 , and magnetic order 31 . Yet, their specific 

influence on altermagnetic spin transport —particularly regarding orbital competition 

and responsiveness to external fields —remains largely unexplored. Furthermore, 

device geometry, such as the use of top -capped electrodes, may introdu ce asymmetric 

layer contributions to spin transport, leading to directional dependence in gate -voltage 

modulation. This effect also requires systematic investigation. 

Here, we systematically investigate the electronic, magnetic, and quantum 

transport properties of bilayer altermagnetic V 2S2O using density functional theory 

(DFT) and non -equilibrium Green’s function (NEG F) calculations. We focus on the 

profound impacts of interlayer interactions, exploring orbital competition, 

strain/electric field tunability, and asymmetric spin transport. Our results reveal that 

interlayer coupling induces a delicate valence band maximum ( VBM ) competition 

between Γ-point p z and X/Y -point p xy orbitals, modulates external field responses, and 

significantly reduces transmission spin polarization. We further demonstrate that 

vertical gate voltage exhibits asymmetric modulation of charge -to -sp in conversion 

efficiency. These findings provide fundamental insights for designing high -performanc 

layered altermagnets , externally tunable spintronic devices. 

RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS 

Interlayer Coupling -Induced Orbital Competition 

Layered V 2S2O adopts cubic lattice with a point group symmetry of D4h . Its monolayer 

comprises three atomic layers, with fully flat V –O plane sandwiched by two outer S 

layers (Fig. 1(a) ). The magnetic V 3+ adopts octahedron coordination with the O and S 

atoms, where the significantly shorter axial V –O bonds (1.92 Å) and the stronger 

crystal -field strength of O compared to S (V –S bonds 2.47 Å) result in a tetragonally 

compressed octahedron (axial compression ). This structural distortion lifts the 

degeneracy of the ideal octahedral (O h) orbital splitting (t 2g and e g), destabilizing states 

with a finite z-component, as shown in Fig. 1( b). Acc ording to Hund’s rules, the two 

electrons of V 3+ occupy the two lowest -energy orbitals dxy and dx²–y² with parallel spins, 

giving a spin -triplet ground state (S = 1). In the magnetic ground of monolayer V2S2O,

the nearest -neighbor V ions adopt antiferromagnetic (AFM) order . Due to the specific 

crystal symmetry (D 4h ) and the orbital -anisotropic crystal -field ground state (occupied 

b2g and b 1g orbitals), the spin -splitting of electronic bands is not simply forbidden as in conventional centrosymmetric antiferromagnets. Instead, the alternating spin 

polarization becomes momentum -dependent, leading to spin -split bands in momentum 

space where states of opposite spin are connected by crystal -symmetry operations (e.g., 

a combinat ion of translation and rotation). This results in a non -relativistic, 

symmetry -enforced spin splitting in the absence of net magnetization —a hallmark of 

altermagnetism. 

Figure 1(c) shows the spin resolved band structure of monolayer V 2S2O, which 

presents a giant spin splitting. This splitting is highly anisotropic and momentum -

dependent, with a wide range of dominant effects, from -0.45 eV to 1.55 eV. The bands 

along Γ-M are spin degenerate due to the spin group symmetry of |C 2||C 4z |, whereas the 

bands along Γ-X and Γ-Y are identical in energy but present spin splitting. The X and 

Y points in this system are donated as the band valleys, where both VBM and 

conduction band m aximum (CBM) are located. For each valley, they belong to opposite 

spin channel , driven by the distinct local chemical environments of the respective sites. 

The spin splitting at CBM and VBM have different natures. We use green, yellow 

and black double -arrows to indicate the orbital splitting at Γ point, exchange -splitting 

and sublattice -splitting at X point (the same at Y point). The spin splitting at CBM (~1 .1 

eV) is derived from the exchange splitting, while the spin splitting at VBM (~0.5 eV) 

is derived from the spin sublattice splitting. This intrinsic difference makes CBM and 

VBM present distinct spin splitting response with respect to external strain and electric         

> Figure 1. (a) Schematic of the monolayer V 2S2O. (b) Schematic representation of the crystal
> field splitting of V d orbitals. (c) and (d) illustrate the band structures of monolayer and
> bilayer V₂S 2O, respectively, with red and blue denoting spin -up and spin -down states. Black
> arrows indicate the sublattice -induced splitting at the X and Y valleys. (e) Magnetic
> configuration of the altermagnetic bilayer V2S2O, where red and blue arrows represent the
> local spin -up and spin -down orientations, respectively. The spatial correlations across
> sublayers with specific symmetry are highlighted. (f) and (g) depict the ground state of
> interla yer stacking and the corresponding sliding energy heatmap.

field. Moreover , the bottom conduction bands are mainly derived from d xz and d yz 

orbitals, while the top valence bands are mainly derived from p orbitals. The top valence 

bands at Γ point are mainly derived from p z orbital, while the VBM at X or Y points are 

derived from p x and p y orbitals, respectively. Thus , the top valence bands at Γ with z -

component orbital are expected to be more significantly affected by interlayer 

interaction, indicated by the band structure of bilayer V₂S 2O as shown in Fig. 1(d) .

Figure 1(e) displays ground -state stack structure of bilayer V2S2O. It adopts an 

AB -like stacking 32 -33 with a relative lower energy of 0.26 eV/f.u. with respect to the 

AA stacking (Fig. 1(f) ). The magnetic ground state of bilayer adopts a G -type AFM 

arrangement (Fig. 1(g) ). In Fig. 1(d) , the impacts of interlayer interactions of bottom 

conduction bands in a relatively moderate magnitude, due to they are mainly derived 

from the d orbitals which are protected within the octahedral . On the contrary, inter layer 

interactions are significant for those more extend p orbitals. For example, at the Γ point, 

the p z or bitals of top valence bands splits into an orbital close to the Fermi level (~ -0.05 

eV) and an orbital 0.9 eV below the Fermi level. In comparison, the VBM at X/Y points 

that are mainly derived from p x and p y orbitals are as robust as the conduction bands 

against the inter layer interactions, where both sublattice splitting and orbital splitting 

are maintained. It’s worth mentioning that monolayer V 2S2O has a well -defined direct 

band gap at X/Y points, while bilayer V 2S2O has a quasi -direct band gap: (i) the CBM 

and VBM positions slightly deviated from the X/Y points; (ii) interlayer coupling 

promotes a profound competition of VBM position between p z orbital at the Γ point and 

pxy orbitals at the X/Y points. The relative energy difference of the top valence band at 

the X/Y points and at the Γ point of AB -stacking bilayer V2S2O is only 9 meV .

Furthermore, in AA -stacking bilayer, stronger interlayer coupling can cause the VBM 

position to shift from the X/Y points to the Γ point. 

Strain and Electric Field Tuning the Interlayer Coupling 

The diagonal mirror symmetry (M Φ), which protects the degeneracy between X 

and Y valleys, can be destroyed via uniaxial strain, laying the basis for the 

piezomagnetic application in altermagnetic systems 34 -35 . Figure 2(a) compares the band 

structures under no strain, uniaxial compressive ( -2%), and tensile (2%) strains (along 

a-axis). While these uniaxial strains only slightly reduce the band gap from pristine 

0.79 eV to 0.75 eV, they significantly modify the competition of VBM position between 

pz orbital and pxy orbitals. Specifically, compressive strain effectively elevates the 

energy of top p xy orbitals by reducing the sublattice splitting along the X direction (Δ X

and Δ Y of Fig. 2(b) -(c) ). In contrast, tensile strain increases sublattice splitting. 

Consequently, under compressive strain, the bilayer V2S2O possesses a pronounced 

direct -like band gap, whereas tensile strain renders the system a fully indirect band gap 

semiconductor. In addition, the energetic degeneracy lifts derived from uniaxial strain give rise to 

a pronounced spin –valley polarization (indicated by the ΔV and ΔC for valence band 

and conduction band, respectively ). Under strain, the valley polarization of the valence 

band is much higher than that of the conduction band. As shown in Fig. 2( d), the ΔV is 

18 meV and 27 meV under -2% and 2% strain s, respectively. While the values of ΔC 

are in the range from the 4 meV of -2% strain to the 1 meV of 2% strain, indicating th at 

the response of ΔC to strain is weak er . It is worth mentioning that a large valley offset 

(ΔV or ΔC) will be beneficial for achieving piezomagnetic effect 26 . Therefore, f rom 

the perspective of strain response, hole doping , due to larger ΔV, is more likely to 

achieve a strong valley piezomagnetic effect in a V 2S2O system. On the other hand, the 

tensile strain will change the VBM position from valley points to the Г point, which 

will greatly suppress piezomagnetic effects. Hence, to achieve a strong piezomagnetic 

effect in bilayer V 2S2O, we suggest to simultaneously apply both compressive strain 

and hole doping. This differs from the case of monolayer V2S2O, whe re the 

piezomagnetic effect of hole -doped monolayers does not require consideration of strain 

type because of the energy window between its valley point and Г point of the top 

valence band is large enough .      

> Figure 2. (a) Band structures of bilayer V 2S2O under uniaxial strain along the a -axis, from -
> 2% to +2% (left to right). The band gap changes from quasi -direct to indirect with increasing
> tensile strain. (b) Schematic of valley splitting, with red and blue lines indicate spin -up and
> spin -down bands, r espectively. (c) The sublattice splitting at the X and Y valleys ( ΔXand ΔY)
> of top valence bands as a function of strain. (d) The energy difference between the X and Y
> valleys as a function of strain: ΔV (valence band) and ΔC (conduction band).

We further investigate the influence of an external electric field (EEF) on bilayer 

V2S2O, which offers an alternative way to manipulate its magnetic and electronic 

properties. Unlike strain, electric field acts directly on the local potential, charge density, 

potentially leading to distinct switching behaviors. The EEF is perpendicularly app lied 

on the V 2S2O sheet with an intensity of ±0.1 V/Å. As shown in Figure 3, the EEF lifts 

the energy degeneracy between layers. The interlayer band gap effectively dec reases in 

proportion to the EEF intensity. The band gap of bilayer V 2S2O was reduced to 0.28 eV 

under an EEF of 0.1 V/Å. The d orbitals of conduction bands are extremely sensitive to 

EEF which directly interacts with the out -of -plane charge distribution (Fig. S2). This 

results in a large Stark shift, manifested as an overall band shift rather than significant 

spin splitting changes . The Stark shift of the valley of the conduction band 

approximately equals to that of the valence band, and can reach up to 530 meV at an 

EEF of 0.1 V/Å. 

On the other hand, a negative EEF lifts the overall electronic potential energy of 

top layer and relatively lowers that of the bottom layer. This causes a relative shift in 

energy levels of different layers , which were originally degenerate, disrupting the 

original band alignment. In other words, EEF provide a layer -resolvable way to study 

the bilayer system. Moreover, EEF can effectively change the competition of the VBM 

position between its valley point s and Г point, for which the energy window was 

enlarged from the 9 meV of pristine bilayer to the 170 meV under EEF of 0.1 V/Å. This 

will greatly enhance the dominant role of the valley electronic state of bilayer V 2S2O

in applications. In a sense, we can claim that EEF can effectively weaken interlayer 

interactions, allowing the physical properties of the bilayer to return to a state close to 

that of monolayer .      

> Figure 3. Spin -polarized band structures and layer -resolved band structures of bilayer V 2S2O
> under the EEF of 0.1V/Å and -0.1V/Å, respectively. The contributions belonging to the top
> layer are marked with green scattering points.

It's also worth mentioning that applying out -of -plane EEF can turn the normal 

AFM bilayer V 2S2O into an altermagnet -like state . The normal AFM bilayer V 2S2O

adopts a C -type AFM configuration (Fig. S3), which preserves the inversion symmetry, 

thus showing spin degeneracy in moment space. Out -of -plane EEF breaks the inversion 

symmetry and induces Stark shift between the top layer and bottom layer. In this case, 

the AFM bilayer V 2S2O changes to two layer -resolvable altermagnetic layers as well 

(Fig. S4). The Stark shift caused by EEF, is almost identical in both AFM and 

altermagnetic cases. However, unlike the pristine altermagnetic bilayer, the AFM 

bilayer unde r an EEF also exhibits momentum -dependent spin splitting, but the splitting 

is reversed between the top and bottom layers. 

Figure 4. (a)  Schematic  illustration of the two -probe quantum transport device based on 

bilayer V2S2O. The device architecture comprises semi -infinite Au leads, a bilayer V2S2O

central scattering region, top/bottom gates, and a 20 Å vacuum layer to eliminate spurious 

periodic interactions. A vertical electric field (E ⟂) is applied perpendicular to the bilayer by 

tuning the gate voltage (V G). (b) Spin -resolved transmission spectra of bilayer V2S2O under 

gate -free (V G = 0 V) and gated conditions (V G = ±0.8 V). The red and blue curves represent 

spin -up (↑) and spin -down (↓) channels, respectively, as a function of energy relative to the 

Fermi level. 

Gate -Voltage Modulated Spin Transport 

Due to the pronounced spin -valley locking properties of altermagnetic V2S2O in 

momentum space, it is expected that the transport efficiency of quasiparticles with 

different spins will differ in specific directions (e.g., along the x and -x directions), 

leading to anisotropic spin conductivity, while the overall conductivity of the system 

remains constant. To further validate our analysis, we performed first principles 

quantum transport simulations based on NEGF -DFT. A two -probe device was constructed (Fig . 4a), comprising a central scattering region based on bilayer V2S2O

with semi -infinite Au electrodes in direct contact with the V2S2O surface. Electron 

transport is investigated along the x direction. A gate voltage (E ⊥) perpendicular to the 

bilayer V2S2O is applied in the transport calculations, with magnitudes of 0 and ±0.8 V. 

Figure 4b displays the spin -resolved transmission spectra of bilayer V2S2O under 

gated and gate -free conditions. The Fermi level (E F) is set to 0 eV as the energy 

reference, which corresponds to the Fermi level of the semi -infinite Au electrodes. Due 

to the formation of a Schottky barrier at the Au/ V2S2O interface, this reference energy 

point lies within the band gap of bilayer V2S2O, as evidenced by the vanishing 

transmission coefficient at E F = 0 eV. It is evident that the device exhibits a pronounced 

spin current above the Fermi level regardless of the gate voltage, whereas the spin 

current becomes negligible for EF < 0 . This transp ort behavior is closely associated with 

the competition in the VBM position between the p z and p xy orbitals, which arises from 

interlayer interactions in the bilayer system . Since Au electrodes are capped exclusively 

on the top layer of V2S2O, the top layer is expected to dominate the total spin current 

contribution in principle. In the absence of interlayer interactions, the spin polarization 

of the transmission coefficient for bilayer V2S2O should be comparable to that of the 

monolayer counterpart. However, the calculated results reveal a remarkably lower spin 

polarization in the bilayer system than in the monolayer (Fig . S5): for instance, at EF =

1 eV, the spin polarization ratio of the transmission coefficient is only 63% for the 

bilayer, in stark contrast to the nearly 100% achieved for the monolayer. This significant 

discrepancy demonstrates that interlayer interactions drastically modulate the spin 

transport properties of bilayer V2S2O.

On the other hand, the gate voltage is found to effectively tune the charge -to -spin 

current conversion efficiency of the bilayer device: an applied gate voltage of +0.8 V 

lift s the spin polarization ratio of the transmission coefficient to 72% at EF = 1 eV .

Notably, the bilayer system exhibits a distinct bias effect in response to gate voltage 

modulation: a gate voltage of -0.8 V results in a spin polarization ratio of 62% at EF =

1 eV , merely a 1% reduction relative to the gate -free case. This directional dependence 

of the gate voltage effect stems from the asymmetric transport contributions of the top 

and bottom layers of V2S2O. As illustrated in Fig . 3, a positive out -of -plane electric 

field significantly lowers the CBM of the bottom layer, thereby enhancing its 

contribution to the overall low -energy device transport. In contrast, a negative gate 

voltage suppresses the transport contribution of the bottom layer; yet, owing to the 

intrinsically minor role of the bottom layer in the total transport, this suppression only 

leads to a slight reduction in th e spin polarization ratio of the total transmission 

coefficient. 

CONCLUSIONS 

In summary, we systematically studied the profound impacts of interlayer 

interactions on the electronic, magnetic and quantum transport properties of bilayer 

altermagnetic V₂S₂O via first -principles simulations. Interlayer coupling selectively 

modulating p -orbital -do minated top valence bands to induce a tiny energy competition 

for VBM between Γ-point p z and X/Y -point p xy orbitals, and imposing compressive 

strain/hole doping dual requirements for a robust piezomagnetic effect —distinct from the strain -insensitive monolayer. Out -of -plane electric fields drive a large Stark shift, 

weaken interlayer coupling, and can convert the normal AFM bilayer to a layer -resolved 

altermagnetic phase. Quantum transport simulations show interlayer interactions 

significantly reduce transmission spin polarization, with vertical gate voltage exhibiting 

a remarkable yet seemingly inevitable asymmetric modulation effect. Our findings 

elucidate interlayer coupling effects in 2D altermagnets, providing critical insigh ts for 

designing high -performance multilayer altermagnetic spintronic devices with external 

field tunability. 

METHODS 

First -principles calculations were performed using the Vienna ab initio simulation 

package (VASP) 36 -37 . The exchange -correlation functional adopts the Perdew -Burke -

Ernzerhof (PBE) form within generalized gradient approximation (GGA). An 8 81 Γ-

centered k grid, a plane -wave energy cutoff of 600 eV, and the Gaussian smearing 

method with a width of 0.05 eV were adopted. A vacuum layer of around 25 Å was 

introduced to reduce the periodic interactions, while the van der Waals (vdW) effect 

was corrected using the DFT -D3 method 38 . A effective Hubbard method 39 with U value 

of 4 eV was used to reduce the seif -interaction errors of localized (strongly 

correlated) 3d orbital of V. Transport calculations were performed by using the quantum 

transport software NANODCAL 40 within the NEGF formalism 41 -42 . The double zeta 

polarized (DZP) atomic orbital basis is used to expand all  the physical quantities with 

an energy cutoff of 80 Hartree;  the  exchange -correlation functional was adopted at the 

PBE level as well; atomic cores were represented by standard norm -conserving 

nonlocal  pseudopotentials; a Fermi smearing of 0.05 eV and 10 k points were used for 

the transport direction. 

ASSOCIATED CONTENT 

Data Availability Statement 

The  data that support the  findings  of this article can be acquired by contacting the 

corresponding author. 

Author Contributions 

The manuscript was written through contributions of all authors. All authors have given 

approval to the final version of the manuscript. Notes The authors declare no competing 

financial interest. 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 

Work at HDU was supported by Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science Foundation 

(LQN25A040011), National Natural Science Foundation of China (12504264 ,

12104118 ), and the Foundation of Hangzhou Dianzi University (KYS075624288). We 

gratefully acknowledge HZWTECH for providing computation facilities. 

REFERENCES 1. Jungwirth, T.; Marti, X.; Wadley, P.; Wunderlich, J., Antiferromagnetic spintronics. Nature 

Nanotechnology 2016, 11 (3), 231 -241. 

2. Žutić, I.; Fabian, J.; Das Sarma, S., Spintronics: Fundamentals and applications. Reviews of Modern 

Physics 2004, 76 (2), 323 -410. 

3. Šmejkal, L.; Sinova, J.; Jungwirth, T., Emerging research landscape of altermagnetism. Physical 

Review X 2022, 12 (4), 040501. 

4. Baltz, V.; Manchon, A.; Tsoi, M.; Moriyama, T.; Ono, T.; Tserkovnyak, Y., Antiferromagnetic 

spintronics. Reviews of Modern Physics 2018, 90 (1), 015005. 

5. Šmejkal, L.; Sinova, J.; Jungwirth, T., Beyond Conventional Ferromagnetism and 

Antiferromagnetism: A Phase with Nonrelativistic Spin and Crystal Rotation Symmetry. Physical Review 

X 2022, 12 (3), 031042. 

6. Zhang, X.; Liu, Q.; Luo, J. -W.; Freeman, A. J.; Zunger, A., Hidden spin polarization in inversion -

symmetric bulk crystals. Nature Physics 2014, 10 (5), 387 -393. 

7. Liu, P.; Li, J.; Han, J.; Wan, X.; Liu, Q., Spin -Group Symmetry in Magnetic Materials with 

Negligible Spin -Orbit Coupling. Physical Review X 2022, 12 (2), 021016. 

8. Reichlova, H.; Lopes Seeger, R.; González -Hernández, R.; Kounta, I.; Schlitz, R.; Kriegner, D.; 

Ritzinger, P.; Lammel, M.; Leiviskä, M.; Birk Hellenes, A., Observation of a spontaneous anomalous 

Hall response in the Mn5Si3 d -wave altermagnet candidate. Nature Communications 2024, 15 (1), 4961. 

9. Chen, H.; Liu, L.; Zhou, X.; Meng, Z.; Wang, X.; Duan, Z.; Zhao, G.; Yan, H.; Qin, P.; Liu, Z., 

Emerging antiferromagnets for spintronics. Advanced Materials 2024, 36 (14), 2310379. 

10. Ma, H. -Y.; Hu, M.; Li, N.; Liu, J.; Yao, W.; Jia, J. -F.; Liu, J., Multifunctional antiferromagnetic 

materials with giant piezomagnetism and noncollinear spin current. Nature communications 2021, 12 (1), 

2846. 

11. Samanta, K.; Shao, D. -F.; Tsymbal, E. Y., Spin filtering with insulating altermagnets. Nano Letters 

2025, 25 (8), 3150 -3156. 

12. González -Hernández, R.; Šmejkal, L.; Výborný, K.; Yahagi, Y.; Sinova, J.; Jungwirth, T.; Železný, 

J., Efficient Electrical Spin Splitter Based on Nonrelativistic Collinear Antiferromagnetism. Physical 

Review Letters 2021, 126 (12), 127701. 

13. Liu, C.; Li, X.; Li, X.; Yang, J., Realizing Abundant Two -Dimensional Altermagnets with 

Anisotropic Spin Current Via Spatial Inversion Symmetry Breaking. Nano Letters 2025, 25 (23), 9197 -

9203. 

14. Reimers, S.; Odenbreit, L.; Šmejkal, L.; Strocov, V. N.; Constantinou, P.; Hellenes, A. B.; Jaeschke 

Ubiergo, R.; Campos, W. H.; Bharadwaj, V. K.; Chakraborty, A.; Denneulin, T.; Shi, W.; Dunin -

Borkowski, R. E.; Das, S.; Kläui, M.; Sinova, J.; Jourdan, M. , Direct observation of altermagnetic band 

splitting in CrSb thin films. Nature Communications 2024, 15 (1), 2116. 

15. Fedchenko, O.; Minár, J.; Akashdeep, A.; D’Souza, S. W.; Vasilyev, D.; Tkach, O.; Odenbreit, L.; 

Nguyen, Q.; Kutnyakhov, D.; Wind, N.; Wenthaus, L.; Scholz, M.; Rossnagel, K.; Hoesch, M.; 

Aeschlimann, M.; Stadtmüller, B.; Kläui, M.; Schönhense, G.; Jungwi rth, T.; Hellenes, A. B.; Jakob, G.; 

Šmejkal, L.; Sinova, J.; Elmers, H. -J., Observation of time -reversal symmetry breaking in the band 

structure of altermagnetic RuO2. Science Advances 2024, 10 (5), eadj4883. 

16. Jiang, B.; Hu, M.; Bai, J.; Song, Z.; Mu, C.; Qu, G.; Li, W.; Zhu, W.; Pi, H.; Wei, Z.; Sun, Y. -J.; 

Huang, Y.; Zheng, X.; Peng, Y.; He, L.; Li, S.; Luo, J.; Li, Z.; Chen, G.; Li, H.; Weng, H.; Qian, T., A 

metallic room -temperature d -wave altermagnet. Nature Physics 2025, 21 (5), 754 -759. 

17. Sun, Y.; Huang, Y.; Cheng, J.; Zhang, S.; Li, Z.; Luo, H.; Ma, X.; Yang, W.; Yang, J.; Chen, D.; Sun, K.; Gutmann, M.; Capelli, S. C.; Shen, F.; Hao, J.; He, L.; Chen, G.; Li, S., Antiferromagnetic structure 

of KV2Se2O: A neutron diffraction study. Physical Review B 2025, 112 (18), 184416. 

18. Liu, B.; Fu, P. -H.; Sun, Y. -X.; Zhang, X. -L.; Zhu, S. -C.; Yu, X. -L.; Wu, H.; Shao, Y. -Z., Intrinsic 

Spin Filter Effect in a $ d $ -wave altermagnet KV2Se2O with Open Fermi Surface. arXiv preprint 

arXiv:2602.21460 2026 .

19. Scheike, T.; Xiang, Q.; Wen, Z.; Sukegawa, H.; Ohkubo, T.; Hono, K.; Mitani, S., Exceeding 400% 

tunnel magnetoresistance at room temperature in epitaxial Fe/MgO/Fe(001) spin -valve -type magnetic 

tunnel junctions. Applied Physics Letters 2021, 118 (4). 

20. Yuasa, S.; Nagahama, T.; Fukushima, A.; Suzuki, Y.; Ando, K., Giant room -temperature 

magnetoresistance in single -crystal Fe/MgO/Fe magnetic tunnel junctions. Nature Materials 2004, 3 (12), 

868 -871. 

21. Wang, X.; Lyu, K. -Y.; Guo, Y.; Li, Y. -X., Quantized crossed Andreev reflection in 

altermagnet/altermagnet topological superconductor/altermagnet heterojunction. Physical Review B 

2026, 113 (1), 014505. 

22. Wang, D.; Ghosh, A. K.; Tao, Y.; Ma, F.; Song, C., Emerging of Anomalous Higher‐Order 

Topological Phases in Altermagnet/Topological Insulator Heterostructure by Floquet Engineering. 

Advanced Science 2026 , e22203. 

23. Pan, B.; Zhou, P.; Lyu, P.; Xiao, H.; Yang, X.; Sun, L., General Stacking Theory for Altermagnetism 

in Bilayer Systems. Physical Review Letters 2024, 133 (16), 166701. 

24. Sun, W.; Wang, W.; Yang, C.; Hu, R.; Yan, S.; Huang, S.; Cheng, Z., Altermagnetism Induced by 

Sliding Ferroelectricity via Lattice Symmetry -Mediated Magnetoelectric Coupling. Nano Letters 2024, 

24 (36), 11179 -11186. 

25. Zhang, R. -W.; Cui, C.; Li, R.; Duan, J.; Li, L.; Yu, Z. -M.; Yao, Y., Predictable gate -field control of 

spin in altermagnets with spin -layer coupling. Physical Review Letters 2024, 133 (5), 056401. 

26. Li, J. -Y.; Fan, A. -D.; Wang, Y. -K.; Zhang, Y.; Li, S., Strain -induced valley polarization, topological 

states, and piezomagnetism in two -dimensional altermagnetic V2Te2O, V2STeO, V2SSeO, and V2S2O. 

Applied Physics Letters 2024, 125 (22). 

27. Wang, D.; Wang, H.; Liu, L.; Zhang, J.; Zhang, H., Electric -field -induced switchable two -

dimensional altermagnets. Nano Letters 2024, 25 (1), 498 -503. 

28. Aoyama, T.; Ohgushi, K., Piezomagnetic properties in altermagnetic MnTe. Physical Review 

Materials 2024, 8 (4), L041402. 

29. Zhu, Y.; Chen, T.; Li, Y.; Qiao, L.; Ma, X.; Liu, C.; Hu, T.; Gao, H.; Ren, W., Multipiezo effect in 

altermagnetic V2SeTeO monolayer. Nano Letters 2023, 24 (1), 472 -478. 

30. Gu, M.; Liu, Y.; Zhu, H.; Yananose, K.; Chen, X.; Hu, Y.; Stroppa, A.; Liu, Q., Ferroelectric 

Switchable Altermagnetism. Physical Review Letters 2025, 134 (10), 106802. 

31. Ga, Y.; Zhang, F.; Wang, L.; Jiang, J.; Chang, K.; Yang, H., Interlayer exchange coupling driven 

magnetic phase transition in a two -dimensional lattice. Physical Review B 2025, 112 (2), L020407. 

32. Peng, R.; Yang, J.; Hu, L.; Ong, W. -L.; Ho, P.; Lau, C. S.; Liu, J.; Ang, Y. S., All -electrical layer -

spintronics in altermagnetic bilayers. Materials Horizons 2025, 12 (7), 2197 -2207. 

33. Qi, Y.; Zhao, J.; Zeng, H., Spin -layer coupling in two -dimensional altermagnetic bilayers with 

tunable spin and valley splitting properties. Physical Review B 2024, 110 (1), 014442. 

34. Bandyopadhyay, S.; Atulasimha, J.; Barman, A., Magnetic straintronics: Manipulating the 

magnetization of magnetostrictive nanomagnets with strain for energy -efficient applications. Applied 

Physics Reviews 2021, 8 (4). 35. Yuan, J. -H.; Yang, X. -K.; Wei, B.; Chen, Y. -B.; Cui, H. -Q.; Liu, J. -H.; Dou, S. -Q.; Song, M. -X.; Fei, 

L., Strain -Mediated Magnetization Switching Behavior in a Bicomponent Nanomagnet. Physical Review 

Applied 2023, 19 (1), 014003. 

36. Kresse, G.; Furthmüller, J., Efficiency of ab -initio total energy calculations for metals and 

semiconductors using a plane -wave basis set. Computational Materials Science 1996, 6 (1), 15 -50. 

37. Kresse, G.; Furthmüller, J., Efficient iterative schemes for ab initio total -energy calculations using 

a plane -wave basis set. Physical Review B 1996, 54 (16), 11169 -11186. 

38. Grimme, S.; Ehrlich, S.; Goerigk, L., Effect of the damping function in dispersion corrected density 

functional theory. Journal of computational chemistry 2011, 32 (7), 1456 -1465. 

39. Dudarev, S. L.; Botton, G. A.; Savrasov, S. Y.; Humphreys, C. J.; Sutton, A. P., Electron -energy -

loss spectra and the structural stability of nickel oxide: An LSDA+U study. Physical Review B 1998, 57 

(3), 1505 -1509. 

40. Xie, Y.; Chen, M.; Wu, Z.; Hu, Y.; Wang, Y.; Wang, J.; Guo, H., Two -Dimensional Photogalvanic 

Spin -Battery. Physical Review Applied 2018, 10 (3). 

41. Henrickson, L. E. J. J. o. a. p., Nonequilibrium photocurrent modeling in resonant tunneling 

photodetectors. 2002, 91 (10), 6273 -6281. 

42. Xie, Y.; Zhang, L.; Zhu, Y.; Liu, L.; Guo, H. J. N., Photogalvanic effect in monolayer black 

phosphorus. 2015, 26 (45), 455202.