Title: 2604.17409v1.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.17409v1

Published Time: Tue, 21 Apr 2026 01:18:56 GMT

Number of Pages: 41

Markdown Content:
1

# Localized Exciton Emission with Spontaneous Circular Polarization in 

# NiPS 3/WSe 2 Heterostructures 

Adi Harchol 1, Shahar Zuri 1, Rajesh Kumar Yadav 2, Nirman Chakraborty 1,3 , Idan Cohen 1, Tomasz 

Wo źniak 4, Thomas Brumme 5, Thomas Heine 5,6,7 *, Doron Nave h2* and Efrat Lifshitz 1*            

> 1. Schulich Faculty of Chemistry, Solid State Institute, Russell Berrie Nanotechnology Institute, Helen Diller Quantum
> Information Center, Technion, Haifa 3200003, Israel
> 2. Faculty of Engineering, Institute for Nanotechnology and Advanced Materials, Bar -Ilan University, Ramat -Gan
> 52900, Israel.
> 3. Eduard Zintl Institute of Inorganic and Physical Chemistry, Technical University of Darmstadt , 64287 Darmstadt,
> Germany
> 4. University of Warsaw, Faculty of Physics, 02 -093 Warsaw, Poland
> 5. Faculty of Chemistry and Food Chemistry, Technische Universität Dresden, 01062 Dresden, Germany.
> 6. Helmholtz -Zentrum Dresden -Rossendorf, Center for Advanced Systems Un derstanding, CASUS, Untermarkt 20,
> 02826 Görlitz, Germany.
> 7. Department of Chemistry and ibs for Nanomedicine, Yonsei University, Seodaemun -gu, Seoul, 120 -749 South
> Korea.
> *Corresponding author s:ssefrat@technion.ac.il ,doron.naveh@gmail.com , thomas.heine@tu -dresden.de

Abstract 

Two -dimensional (2D) van der Waals (vdW) heterostructures (HSs) provide a versatile platform for 

tailoring electronic, optical, and magnetic properties via proximity effects at their interfaces. In this 

work, we explore the optical response of few -layer N iPS 3/WSe 2 HSs using low -temperature micro -

photoluminescence (μ -PL ) and magneto -PL spectroscopy. The HSs exhibit multiple sharp excitonic 

peaks that do not appear in the individual constituent materials, indicating the emergence of localized 

intralayer WSe 2 excitons confined by interface -induced potentials . Notably, thes e excitons exhibit 

spontaneous circular polarization even in the absence of an external magnetic field, suggesting a

magnetic proximity effect induced by uncompensated spins at the N iPS 3 interface . Magneto -PL 

measurements further reveal nonlinear Zeeman sp litting, consistent with the presence of an 

interfacial exchange field that alters the valley exciton dynamics. Density functional theory (DFT) 

calculations confirm the intralayer origin of the PL and reveal interfacial hybridization and spin texture 

modif ications, supporting the experimental findings. These results highlight how combin ing a 2D 

semiconductor with a layered antiferromagnet enables control over valley polarization and spin 

degrees of freedom, offering new opportunities for chiral light sources and magnetically tunable 

optoelectronic devices. 

Keywords: NiPS 3/WSe 2 heterostructu res, magnetic proximity effect, valley polarizatio n, 2D materials ,

interface -induced potential. 2

1. Introduction 

In the last two decades, two -dimensional ( 2D ) van der 

Waals (vdW ) materials have garnered substantial 

interest due to their potential for tailoring properties via 

the formation of heterostructures ( HSs ). The physical 

properties of the HSs constituent materials can be 

strongly influenced by proximity effects. 1–3 The transition 

metal dichalcogenides (TMDs) semiconductors , such as 

tungsten diselenide ( WSe 2), have garnered immense 

interest for their direct bandgap in the monolayer limit, 

tightly b ound excitons, and strong spin -valley coupling. 4– 

> 8

In each monolayer, tungsten (W) atoms are sandwiched 

between two selenium (Se) layers, with strong covalent 

bonding in -plane and comparatively weak vdW 

interactions out -of -plane ( Figure 1a ). WSe 2 crystalizes in 

the hexagonal P6 3/mmc space group , with latt ice 

constant s of a = b = 0.33 nm and c = 1.37 nm. 9 Monolayer 

WSe 2 features broken inversion symmetry , giv ing rise to 

two degenerate yet inequivalent valleys (K and K′) at the 

Brillouin zone corners, which can be selectively excited using circularly polarized light. 10 Th is valley -

selective selection rule underlies the field of valleytronics, in which the valley index of carriers serves 

as a new degree of fr eedom for information processing. Recent studies have leveraged these 

properties for valleytronics, demonstrating that applying a magnetic field (Zeeman effect) lifts the 

valley degeneracy and yields measurable valley polarization in photoluminescence (PL) 

spectroscopy .11 However, the Zeeman -induced splitting in bare monolayer WSe 2 is relatively small 

(~0.2 meV/T) ,12 motivating alternative routes for leveraging the valley polarization via a proximity to 

a magnetic vdW layer .13 –16 

An intriguing magnetic vdW compound is the nickel phosphorus trisulfide ( NiPS 3), which belongs to 

the broader MPX₃ family (M = Fe, Ni, Mn; X = S, Se) of layered antiferromagnets. NiPS 3 adopts a 

monoclinic structure (space group C2/m) , with lattice parame ters a = 0.58 nm, b = 1.01 nm, c = 0.66 

nm, and 𝛽 = 107 ˚.17 Within each layer, Ni atoms form a near -honeycomb network coordinated by sul fur 

(S) and phosphorus (P) atoms ( Figure 1b ). Below its Néel temperatu re (~155 K), NiPS 3 exhibit zigzag in -

plane antiferromagnetic (AFM) order , with a slight canting (~8° ) out of plane (Figure 1b , bottom) .18,19 

This magnetic arrangement giv es rise to various electronic -magnetic phenomena ,20 –22 including a

linearly polarized PL band at 1.476 eV .23 –28 

Th erefore, combining a semiconducting TMDs with a magnetic vdW crystal , whether ferro - or 

antiferromagnetic, enables a vast number of new phenomena ,1,2,29 –31 due to strai n, interfac ial spin -

orbit interactions and magnetic proximity .3,32 –37 The placing of a monolayer TMD on FM substrate such 

as EuS or CrI₃ 14,38 –41 showed that a proximity field with an effective magnetic field of tens of tesla, lifted 

the valley degeneracy by several meV. 13 –16 Recent work on few -layer WS 2 on the AFM FePS 3 exhibited 

the emergence of an interfacial FM and sizeable valley splitting. 42 Furthermore, chiral quantum 

emitters have been reported in WSe 2/NiPS 3 under local ly induced strain. 36 Yet , a comprehensive study 

of unstrained NiPS 3/WSe 2 HSs, particularly in the few -layer regime, remains relatively unexplored. 

In this work, we report the optical and magneto -optical response of few -layer NiPS 3/WSe 2 HSs . Low -

temperature micro photoluminescent (μ-PL ) spectroscopy uncover s the emergence of multiple sharp 

peaks , absent in either parent crystal, which are attributed to localized excitons likely confined by an                           

> Figure 1. a. side -view (top) and top -view
> (bottom) of the WSe 2and b. NiPS 3crystal
> structure. Red and blue arrows represent two
> oppositely aligned spins of Ni 2+ ions ,
> corresponding to the AFM zigzag configuration.
> The armchair and zigzag crystallographic
> directions of both materials are marked by black
> arrows in the top -view illustration of WSe 2.

a b3

interface potential . Strikingly, the emission from these localized states exhibits strong circular 

polarization at zero external magnetic field, pointing to a valley polarization induced by the interfaci al 

proximity of WSe 2 to uncompensated spins at the NiPS 3 interface . Density functional theory (DFT) 

calculations confirm the intralayer nature of the optical transition and reveal a spatially varying 

potential that act s as a trapping site for the exciton. In addition, the calculations show strong 

interfacial orbital hybridization between WSe 2 and NiPS 3, which modifies the spin texture at the 

interface . This study expands the horizon of v dW HSs by combining a 2D semiconductor with an 

antiferromagnet to enable controllable spin -valley effects and chiral excitonic emitters. 

2. Results and Discussion 

2.1. Fabrication and Characterization. Figure 2a presents optical microscope image s of the 

investigated HS s, fabricated via a dry -transfer technique . Device 1 (HS1 , top panel in Figure 2a), has a 

stacked sequence of Si/SiO 2, hBN, NiPS 3, and WSe 2. Device 2 (HS2 , bottom panel in Figure 2a)

incorporates Si/SiO 2, Au electrodes, NiPS 3, WSe 2, and a capping hBN layer . The Au electrodes in HS2 

facilitate photoconductivity measurements, details of which will be published separately. In both 

devices, the NiPS 3 flakes are multilayer, while the WSe 2 flakes consist of a few layers - 35 layers in HS 1

and 10 layers in HS2 - as determined by atomic force microscopy (AFM) (see supporting information 

(SI), Figure S1a ,b ). Figure 2b shows Raman spectra acquired at three distinct locations on Device 2 :

pure NiPS 3, pure WSe 2, and the overlapping NiPS 3/WSe 2 region . The Raman modes of both NiPS 3 and 

WSe 2 align well with previously reported values for unstrained crystals, 43,44 confirming the high quality 

of the exfoliated flakes. The spectrum of the HS region exhibits the characteristic Raman peaks of 

WSe 2 along with weak additio nal peaks (marked with asterisks) corresponding to the P 2, P5, P 7 and P 8

modes of NiPS 3, confirm ing the presence of both materials in the stacked region. Similar Raman results 

for Device 1 are shown in the SI, Figure S1c . Essentially , the main vibrational modes of WSe 2 in the HS 

region show no discernible shift , broadening or splitting compared to the exposed WSe 2, providing 

strong evidence for the absence of strain in the HS (see Section 1.1 in the SI for peak fitting and 

analysis) . Figure 2c display s polarized s econd harmonic generation ( P-SHG ) plots from the WSe 2 (blue) 

and NiPS 3 (pink) regions in Device 1 (top) and Device 2 (bottom) , together with theoretical fit s (see 

Section 1. 2 in the SI for more details) , showing good agreement with the expected angular 

dependence. Consistent with prior studies, 45,46 few -layer WSe 2 show s a six -fold symmetry , reflecting Si                         

> Si
> PP
> P
> P
> P
> P
> Se
> iPS
> S
> iPS
> Se
> SP
> Si
> Figure 2. a. Optical microscope images of Device 1 (top) and Device 2 (bottom) b. Raman
> spectra of Device 2 recorded at three different locations on top of the sample: NiPS 3, WSe 2,
> and NiPS 3/WSe 2HS (from top to bottom), measured under 532 nm laser excitation at room
> temperature. c. P-SHG polar plots acquired from NiPS 3(pink squares ) and WSe 2(blue
> squares ) regions of Device 1 (top) and Device 2 (bottom), shown together with fitted curves
> (solid lines).

a b c4

the threefold rotational symmetry. In contrast, a loss of six -fold symmetry is observed for the NiPS 3,

presumably due to its mono clinic lattice and stacking offset between adjacent honeycomb layers. 45 

WSe 2 and NiPS 3 possess distinct crystal structures , leading to strongly incommensurate HSs. As a 

result, the HSs are not expected to reconstruct into metastable stacking configurations, as commonly 

observed in commensurate or nearly commensurate TMD HSs and the formation of a well -defined 

moir é superlattice is therefore unlikely .

2.2. PL Measurements. Low temperature (4 K) μ-PL spectroscopy was employed to probe the 

optical emission across different regions of the sample . Measurements were performed under 

unpolarized excitation using a 480 nm continuous -wave laser and were collected at the center of each 

region , far from any flake edges, to exclu de edge -related defect emission . Figure 3a compares the PL 

spectr a of exposed NiPS 3 (red line) and the overlapped NiPS 3/WSe 2 region in both HSs , presented by 

the blue and green lines . The PL of t he exposed NiPS 3 region depicts a sharp emission band at 1.476 

eV, matching reported excitonic transitions in NiPS 3.21,23,26,47 This emission exhibits strong linear 

polarization (inset to Figure 3c ), consistent with NiPS 3’s in -plane anisotropy . Conversely , the bare few -

layer WSe 2 region shows negligible PL , characteristic of forbid den optical transition in few -layer WSe 2

(Figure S3 in the SI) .48,49 This confirms that the strong emission in the HS s originates only from the 

NiPS 3/WSe 2 interface , and not from the individual WSe 2 or NiPS 3 flakes alone. 

In contrast to either individual material ,21,48 the emission spectra of the HSs exhibit a series of discrete 

PL peaks spanning the range of 1.48 - 1.56 eV (blue and green curves in Figure 3a ). Specifically, HS1 

exhibits up to seven narrow emission lines, including a closely spaced group ( p1 -p3 ) with mutual 

energy separations of ~7 meV , and a second set of lines (p1, p4, p5) with energy separation of ~35 

meV between consecutive peaks . A weak NiPS 3 emission line at 1.476 eV is also observed in the PL 

spectrum of HS 1 (marked with an asterisk) . In addition , a faint peak near 1.63 eV ( also marked with 

an asterisk) appears , but is not discussed any further here. The PL spectrum of HS2 exhibits a primary 

emission line at ~1.56 eV (p6) , along with satellite peaks located ~20 meV and ~40 meV below the 

main emission band . The sharp lines observed in the PL spectr a of the HSs are attributed to localized 

excitons confined by interface -induced potentials or defect -induced traps at the NiPS 3/WSe 2

interface 36,50 –53 . These features resemble the multi -peak emission patterns reported for moiré -

trapped excitons in TMD bilayers or localized excitons at potential minima. 54,55 Further discussion of 

the multi -line origin is provided below. In addition, t he intensity of these peaks significantly decreased       

> Figure 3. a. PL spectra of an exposed NiPS 3region (pink), HS1 (blue), and HS2 (green), excited by 480 nm laser at 5 K. b.
> Polar plots of PL intensity under linear polarization detection for the p1 (blue) and p6 (green) peaks. The red solid lines
> represent fits to the data. c. Linear polarization dependence of PL intensity for peaks p1 -p5 in HS1. Inset: Linear
> polarization de pendence of an exposed NiPS 3region. Solid lines represent fits to the data, except for p5, where the solid
> line serves only as a visual guide.

a b c5

above 50 K ( see Figure S 4 and Section 2.2 in the SI) . In additional heterostructure s of NiPS 3/WSe 2

(denoted as HS3 and HS4) , not discussed in detail here, a sharp emission peak at 1.56 eV was also 

observed ( Figure S 8 in the SI), consistent with the emission features seen in both HS1 and HS2 , which 

further confirms the reproducibility of the optical response in the NiPS 3/WSe 2 HSs. 

Polarization -Resolved PL Measurements . Figure 3b presents the linear polarization of the 1.56 eV 

emission peak of HS1 (p1) and HS2 (p 6). The intensity versus polarization angle ( 𝜃 ) follow the relation :

𝐼 0 + 𝐼 𝑑 ∙ sin 2(𝜃 − 𝜃 𝑚𝑎𝑥 ), where 𝐼 0 is the minimum PL intensity, 𝐼 𝑑 is the difference between minimum 

and maximum intensity, and 𝜃 𝑚𝑎𝑥 is the angle corresponding to the maximum intensity (solid lines in 

Figure s 3b and 3c). It is important to note that both devices were not aligned along a specific 

crystallographic axis of either NiPS 3 or WSe 2; hence , the polarization angles of P1 and P6 ( Figure 3b )

are arbitrary. Additional peaks in the PL spectrum of HS1 also exhibit pronounced linear polarization ,

as shown in Figure 3c . Th is behavior is likely associated with inversion symmetry breaking at the 

interface, which induces a preferred excitonic dipole orientation . Moreover , the in -plane magnetic 

anisotropy of bulk NiPS 3 may contribute to stabiliz ing the exciton emission along specific 

crystallographic direction .

However, the NiPS 3 characteristic linear polarization of the 1.476 eV emission band found in pure NiPS 3

slabs (inset, Figure 3c ) is absent in the related PL peak of the heterostructure (Figure 3c , purple circles). 

This suppression is likely due to the weak emission signal o f NiPS 3 in the heterostructure, which is 

often difficult to resolve above the background noise, as shown by the polarization -resolved PL spectra 

in Figure S5 in the SI .

Notably, circularly polarized detection of the heterostructure emission bands at zero external 

magnetic field reveals an intrinsic helicity . Figure 4a depicts the PL spectra of HS1 (top) and HS2 

(bottom) , measured under circular polarization detection . The detection path was calibrated using the 

PL emission of bare NiPS 3, which exhibits strong linear polarization but negligible circular polarization 

(see Figure S6 in the SI). The absence of circular polarization in this reference confirms that the optical 

setup does not introduce artificial helicity. The optical alignment was further verified by the systematic 

evolution of the circular polarization with the applied magnetic field (shown below), confirming its 

intrinsic origin. Remarkably, even at zero applied magnetic field, the HSs show a preferred helicit y in 

their emiss ion , suggesting an effective interfacial exchange field arising from uncompensated or 

canted spins at the NiPS 3 interface . Although bulk NiPS 3 is an antiferromagnet with zigzag in -plane 

ordering , perfect magnetic compensation may not be preserved at surfac es or interfaces, where the 

absence of neighboring NiPS 3 layers and hybridization with WSe 2 can modify the spin configuration .42 

The opposite helicity observed in HS1 and HS2 likely reflects variations in the interfacial spin 

configuration of the NiPS 3 flakes between independently assembled heterostructures. To assess 

spatial uniformity, circularly polarized PL measurements were per formed at multiple locations across 

the HSs ( Figure S7 in the SI), all yielding the same helicity and consistent spectral features, with minor 

variations in peaks intensities. This result contrasts with prior studies of monolayer WSe 2/NiPS 3 HSs, 

which repo rted negligible circular polarization at B = 0 T in the unstrained regime. 36 The discrepancy 

likely originates from th e WSe 2 thickness: in Ref. 36 the PL was dominated by broad emission from 

monolayer WSe 2, which can overlap with or mask weaker interfacial emission. In contrast, the present 

HSs incorporate few -layer WSe 2, which exhibits negligible PL at 5 K ( Figure S3 in the SI) , thereby 

enabling direct observation of emission arising from the NiPS 3/WSe 2 interface .6

2.3. Magneto -PL Measurements .

Magneto -PL measurements were 

performed on the investigated HSs by 

applying an external out -of -plane 

magnetic field (𝐵 ⃗ ⊥ 𝑎 ̂ , 𝑏 ̂ ) while 

measuring the emission under 

circular ly polarized detection normal 

to the 𝑎 ̂ , 𝑏 ̂ pla ne . Figures 4b and 4c

depict the circularly resolved 

emission spectra for HS1 and HS2, 

respectively , recorded at different 

magnetic field strengths . The degree 

of circular polarization (DCP) is 

defined as: 

(1) 𝜌 = |𝐼 𝜎 + −𝐼 𝜎 −| 

> 𝐼 𝜎 ++𝐼 𝜎 −

where 𝐼 𝜎 + (𝐼 𝜎 − ) is the PL intensity of the 𝜎 + (𝜎 −) component, is plotted vs. B for HS1 and HS2 in 

Figures 5a and 5b , respectively . In HS1 (HS2) , negative fields yield DCP of ~0.7 (~0.6) , whereas at 

positive fields the emission be comes nearly unpolarized ( DCP ≈ 0). 

Figures 5c and 5d extract the energy shift of the 𝜎 + and 𝜎 − components ( 𝐸 𝜎 + and 𝐸 𝜎 − ), relative to 

the zero -field energy of the 𝜎 + component, for S ’s p and S ’s p 6 peaks , respectively . The results 

reveal an asymmetric signature in the energy shift of the 𝜎 + and 𝜎 − branches in both HSs . Subtracting 

these energies yields a Zeeman split ( ∆𝐸 = 𝐸 𝜎 + − 𝐸 𝜎 − ) as shown in Figures 5e and 5f . A purely linear 

Zeeman effect would produce a straigh t line against B with slope proportional to an effective g-factor 

(∆𝐸 = 𝑔 𝑒𝑓𝑓 𝜇 𝐵 𝐵 , where 𝜇 𝐵 is the Bohr magneton), where a typical g-factor for the free exciton in WSe 2

is -4. 6,12 Ho wever, the plots in Figure 5e and 5f deviate markedly from linearity at |𝐵 | > 2 𝑇 (orange -

shaded regions) , indicating the presence of an additional contribution beyond the conventional 

Zeeman effect. This kind of asymmetric coupling and splitting that diverge s from linearity at high 

magnetic fields is a well -established signature of the magnetic proximity effect previously observed in 

AFM /TMD and FM /TMD HSs .13 –15,35,42 The shape of ∆𝐸 as a function of magnetic field can be directly 

related to the magnetization behavior of a FM material, 13 and thus follow s the equation (For more 

details, see Section 4 in the SI) :

(2) ∆𝐸 (𝐵 ) = 𝑔 𝑒𝑓𝑓 𝜇 𝐵 [𝐵 + 𝐵 𝑒𝑥𝑐 tanh ( 𝐵 

> 𝐵 0

)]        

> Figure 4. a. PL spectra of HS1 (top) and HS2 (bottom) recorded under
> circularly polarized detection at zero external magnetic field. b, c.
> Circularly resolved PL spectra of HS1 ( b) and HS2 ( c) measured under
> varying out -of -plane magnetic fields. The measurements were
> performed under 488 nm laser excitation.

a b c7

Here, 𝐵 𝑒𝑥𝑐 represent the effective interfacial exchange field , and 𝐵 0 denotes the characteristic field 

for saturation transition (i.e. , the field required to align most of the magnetic moments in the FM 

material ). As shown in Figures 5e and 5f , this model (black dashed line) provides a better fit to the 

experimental data than the linear Zeeman expression (red dashed line), particularly at higher magnetic 

fields. F itting yields an exchange field of Bexc =25 T and B0=3 T for HS1 , and Bexc =27 T with B0=2.9 T for 

HS2 . Exchange field s of s imilar magnitudes have previously been reported in EuS /WSe 2,13 CrI 3/WSe 2,15 

and bilayer WS 2 positioned on bulk FePS 3 slabs .42 Additional analysis of the Zeeman splitting for the 

p4 and p5 emission peaks in HS1 is provided in Figure S 9 in the SI , showing similar nonlinear behavior 

and exchange parameters to those extracted for p1, further supporting a common origin for these 

excitonic peaks .

2.4. Discussion: The origin of the emitting exciton. A pivotal question is whether the observed PL 

emission ba nds arise from intralayer excitons in WSe 2, interlayer excitons , or localized states (e.g., 

exciton trapped in an interfac ial or defect potential s). Several pieces of evidence suggest that the 

discussed e mission events mainly originate from localized intralayer excitons in WSe 2 that experience 

a magnetic proximity effect. 

First, the extremely narrow linewidths and the multiplicity of emission peaks strongly suggest the 

presence of quantum -confined excitonic states. In contrast, a delocalized interlayer exciton would 

typically manifest as a single, broad emission band - several meV wide - due to its long lifetime ( arising 

from weak oscillator strength) and indirect band nature. Furthermore , in many type -II TMD HSs ,

interlayer excitons are significantly redshifted by tens to hundreds of meV relative to the bright 

intralayer exciton. 56 Partial charge transfer in such systems often leads to quenching of th e intralayer 

PL. By contrast, the NiPS 3/WSe 2 HSs studied here , which also have type -II band alignment, display 

multiple discrete peaks near the expected energy of the direct intralayer exciton of few -layer WSe 2

(around 1.7 eV for tri layer WSe 2 at low temperatures) .48,57 The discrete nature of the emission points 

toward confinement within localized potentials . In deed , l ocalized defect states in monolayer WSe 2

have been observed in the 1.63 -1.68 eV range , with emission vanish ing above 65 K due to thermal 

dissociation ,58 which is consistent with the thermal quenching observed in HS1 and HS2, where the PL 

disappear s above 50 K ( Figure s S4a,b in the SI) . However, defect localization is unlikely to be the 

dominant mechanism in the present case for two reasons: (i) defect states are usually randomly 

distributed and rarely exhibit reproducible polarization characteristic, and (ii) the observed emission               

> Figure 5. a, b. DCP as a function of magnetic field for selected peaks in HS1 ( a) and HS2 ( b). c, d. Energy shifts of the σ+and σ-
> components for the p1 peak in HS1 ( c) and the p6 peak in HS2 ( d), plotted relative to the zero -field energy of their σ+component.
> e, f. Zeeman splitting of the p1 ( e) and p6 ( f) peaks. The red dashed lines are fits to a lin ear Zeeman model, while the black
> dashed lines include an additional exchange field term as described by Eq. 2 .

a

b

c

d

e

f8

peaks are consistent across different devices and locations. In contrast, m oiré -trapped excitons have 

been widely reported as multiple sharp PL peaks in twisted Mo Se 2/WSe 2 HSs 39 and twisted W Se 2

homobilayers. 54 In the latter, for 1.3° twist angle , intralayer excitons in the top layer are trapped by 

the moiré potential of the bottom layer, yielding multiple peaks between 1.55 –1.73 eV ,54 with an 

energy spread of ~180 me V. A remarkably deep moir é potential , reaching up to 130 meV, has also 

been reported in MoSe 2/MoS 2 HSs .59 Therefore, exciton confi nement by a moir é potential is a

compelling mechanism in 2D system s. However, in the present work , both NiPS 3 and WSe 2 are 

relatively thick, and the two materials are strongly incommensurate , precluding the formation of a 

well -defined moiré superlattice . Nevertheless, even without a periodic moiré lattice, the interface can 

host multiple local high -symmetry stacking configurations . Because no long -range commensurate 

reconstruction occurs, these local registries can arise for a wide range of relative orientations and are 

therefore not uniquely determined by the twist angle . Such local potentials give rise to spatially 

va rying interface potentials that can act as exciton traps , resembl ing the confinement observed for 

moir é excitons in commensurate TMD HSs . This scenario is further supported by the theoretical 

calculations presented later in the text .

While some charge transfer may still occur, the PL intensity and energy are clearly dominated by WSe 2-

localized emission. Note that the 1.56 eV peak in HS1 and HS2 falls within the typical range reported 

for in -plane strained WSe 2 emitter s.55,60 However, Raman analysis of the main WSe 2 peaks in th e

heterostructures (Figure S2 ) reveals no discernible shift, broadening, or splittin g, indicating that any 

residual strain is minimal and unlikely to be the origin of the observed optical properties .

A second key observation is the emergence of spontaneous circular polarization at zero magnetic field 

(Figure 4a ). Pure multi -layered WSe 2 emission does not intrinsically exhibit valley polarization. Yet, the 

observation of 50% -70% DCP in the present case is compelling evidence for exchange coupling 

between localized WSe 2 excitons and NiPS 3 spins. A possible origin of the effective exchange field is 

the presence of uncompensated spins at the NiPS 3/WSe 2 interface. Such spins may arise from orbital 

hybridization between NiPS 3 and WSe 2 or from symmetry b reaking at the NiPS 3 interface, which can 

modify the magnetic arrangement. Further support arises from the nonlinear signature observed in 

the magneto -PL spectra ( Figures 5c -f). For isolated WSe 2 exciton s, the Zeeman splitting is expected to 

vary linearly with magnetic field , with a characteristic g-factor of −4. 6,12 Here, the measured energy 

splitting (∆𝐸 ) deviates from linearity above ~2 T and instead follows Equation 2, which incorporates 

an additional interfacial exchange field term (Bexc ). This nonlinear Zeeman response closely resembles 

the behavior recently observed in FePS 3/WS 2 HSs ,42 reporting a saturation of the valley splitting in few -

layers S₂ placed on the AFM material FePS 3. In that system, the splitting was likewise attributed to 

a strong interfacial exchange field , driven by the emergen ce of FM ordering at the FePS 3 interface .

In vdW HSs, interfacial orbital hybridization is expected to play a critical role in determining the 

electronic and magnetic properties of the combined system. 42,61 Such hybridization is typically 

dominated by the overlap of out -of -plane orbitals , particularly when energy levels and orbital 

symmetry are compatible. In the present system , the Ni 3d orbital s (which have an out -of -plane 

orientation) can hybridize with the W orbital s across the vdW gap , provided that the local alignment 

and energy conditions are favorable. T he d-d orbital coupling may facilitate strong exchange 

interactions that not only influence exciton properties but also induce anisotropies and modifications 

to the local spin structure .42 Additional e vidence for interfacial hybridization and spin rearrangement 

is provided by the theoretical calculations presented in the following section. 

Overall , the evidence suggests that the emitting exciton in Ni PS 3/W Se 2 HS s is an intralayer W Se 2

exciton localized by an interfac ial potential and subject to an effective exchange field arising from 9

uncompensated spins at the NiPS 3 interface . The result ing nonlinear and asymmetric valley splitting is 

consistent with models of magnet ic proximity coupling in vdW HSs .14,35,39 

2.5. Discussion: theoretical insights. Guided by the optical measurements, which indicate that the 

observed emission originates from the NiPS 3/WSe 2 interface, the calculations focus on explicitly 

capturing the interaction between the two materials. To 

this end, the electronic structure of mono - and bilayer 

WSe 2 interfaced with monolayer NiPS 3 was calculated 

using DFT as implemented in the all -electro n FHI -aims code 

(For more details, see SI, Section 6 ). 62 –64 This reduced 

model captures the essential interfacial physics while 

remaining computationally tractable, since the dominant 

electronic coupling occurs at the interface and layers 

further away are expected to have a much weaker 

influence. The resulting band stru cture for the bilayer 

WSe 2/monolayer NiPS 3 HS is shown in Figure 6 . The 

valence band maxim a (VBM) are dominated by the WSe 2

valence states (black and orange lines in Figure 6 ), while 

the conduction band minim a (CB M) are composed of Ni 3d 

states (green lines in Figure 6 ). Their distance to the CB 

edge of WSe 2 depends very much on specific details of the 

experimental setup. For instance , the multilayer WSe 2

flakes used in the experiments exhibit a reduced bandgap 

compared to the bi layer WSe 2. In addition , the pron ounced 

linear polarization of the PL emission observed 

experimentally (Figure 3b,c ) provides compelling evidence for broken in -plane symmetry and strongly 

suggests the existence of a built -in electric field at the NiPS 3/WSe 2 interface. This internal field is likely 

a consequence of structural asymmetr y, which is inherent to the vertical stacking of the HSs .

Additional support for th e presence of this field comes from current -voltage (I-V) measurement s

performed on HS2 , which confirms th e formation of a p-n junction across the NiPS 3/WSe 2 interface 

(see SI, Figure S 10 ). Such a n electric field shift s the Ni 3d states towards the WSe 2 conduction band ,

facilitating the possibility for hybridization or interfacial charge transfer . Therefore, i n all further 

theoretical results , a small external electric field was included, mimicking these experimental 

peculiarities . A demonstration of the electric field effect is provided in the SI (Figure S 12).

The calculations were initiated with a full relaxa tion of the HS , including the atomic positions as well 

as the lattice parameters. The final relaxed structure shows that the lattice parameter of WSe 2

increase s by approximately 0.4%. Furthermore, the interlayer distance in high -symmetry stackings 

changes by 0.01 Å, while for smaller twist angles, the change can be twice that value . Although this is 

smaller than the change of the interlayer distance in TMD HSs, it still indicates that the two systems 

influence each other on a structural level. To allow for a better comparison with a single mono layer 

or bilayer WSe 2, the lattice of all calculated systems was fixed to the fully relaxed WSe 2 bulk lattice. 

First, the interface potential was estimated by calculating six high -symme try stacking configuration s, 

as shown in the SI , Figure S13. The maximal change in the intralayer gap is only about 18.7 meV .

Assuming a simple hard sphere model ,65 some of the Se atoms can fit into the corresponding grooves 

or holes of NiPS 3, but not all align perfectly . Accordingly , the interlayer distance is mostly determined 

by the chalcogen atoms that lie nearly on top of each other ; thus , the change in the intralayer gap of 

WSe 2 is much smaller than in TMD HSs .54,66 The lower interfacial potential estimated by DFT (~18.7 

meV) compared to experimental values (40 –80 meV) is expec ted, given DFT’s limitations in calculating             

> Figure 6.Band structure of monolayer NiPS 3
> on bilayer WSe 2.The color indicates the
> components contributing predominantly to
> each band. The interfacial dipole leads to a
> small splitting of the valence -band maxima of
> the two WSe 2layers. The Brillouin zone and
> high -symm etry points are shown in Figure 7 .

10 

excited -states energies, exciton binding energies, and the constraints of minimal unit cell simulations 

that cannot fully capture local structural relaxations .

A direct calculation of the excitonic properties of the relaxed HSs is not feasible due to the large 

number of electronic states and their complex dispersion as well as the highly correlated nature of the 

NiPS 3 exciton .67 Yet, the intensity of an optical transition is directly propor tional to the squared 

momentum (or optical) matrix elements (MMEs) between the valence and conduction bands. 68 For 

TMDs and their HSs , it is known that the strongest interlayer transitions have a two to three orders of 

magnitude lower intensity than their intralayer counterpar ts .68 Comparing the M MEs of the strongest 

WSe 2 intralayer transition with those of the interlayer transitions , a striking difference of at least six 

orders of magnitude is found . Figure 7 a (the left -hand panel s) shows the WSe 2 intralayer transition 

with the largest MME , correspond ing to the absorption of a circular ly polarized photon at the K point 

(which is backfolded to the  point ). Figure 7b (right -hand panels ) display s the strongest interlayer 

transition at the  point (i.e., at the lowest energy) , corresponding to the absorption of linear ly 

polarized photons. A direct comparison between these two transitions reveals MMEs of 7 × 10 −2

(ħ/a 0)2 for the WSe 2 intralayer absorption versu s 2 × 10 −8 (ħ/a 0)2 for the interlayer absorption . While               

> Figure 7.a. Intensity of σ+-polarized light for the spin -allowed transition between the VBM and the CBM+1 at the K point
> of monolayer WSe 2in the monolayer/monolayer HS .The upper, middle, and lower panels show a map of the intensity,
> the band structure of the HS with the initial and final state marked in red, and the MMEs along the high -symmetry lines
> indicated in the upper panel, respectively. The K (Q) points of the hexagonal monolayer lattice are mapped (close) to the
> point of the HS, and thus the strongest transition is not to the first CB above the Ni 3d bands. b.Intensity for linearly
> polarized light for the strongest interlayer transition.

a b11 

the PL signal is also influenced by the electron -hole interaction and the increased screening associated 

with the multilayer character of the samples , these effects impact both the intra - and interlayer 

excitons . Therefore, it appear s highly unlikely that such a large disparity in the MMEs could be 

compensate d, making intralayer transitions the dominant 

contributor to the observed PL , a conclusion further supported 

by the experimental observations prese nted in this work. 

The calculations for the monolayer WSe 2/monolayer NiPS 3

interface further show an increase in the degree of linear 

polarization (DLP) to approximately 25% for the strongest 

intralayer transition at the WSe 2 K point , once the NiPS 3 band s

approach the WSe 2 conduction band (see Figure S15 in the SI ).

Yet, even more importantly , the DLP becomes asymmetric - the 

difference between the MMEs along X and the -Y increase s.

This asymmetry becomes even more pronounced in the case 

of bilayer WSe 2 interfaced with monolayer NiPS 3 (Figure S 16).

Additional results and details about the MMEs can be found in 

the SI , section 6.

Next, the isosurface of the probability density of the final state 

of the WSe 2 intralayer transition , shown in Figure 7a , was 

calculated and is presented in Figure 8 . While this transition 

has a clear intralayer character, a finite probability density is 

also observed on the NiPS 3 layer, indicating an interlayer 

hybridization . A similar , though weaker, hybridization is seen 

in t he VB M. This hybridization is further manifested in the 

preferred spin alignment at the interface, as revealed by the 

spin texture calculations (presented in the SI, Figure S 17). The 

spin texture analysis shows that the spin character of both the 

WSe 2 conduction bands and the unoccupied Ni 3d bands 

changes once these states approach each other energetically 

(e.g., under an interfacial electric field). Pronounced changes 

appear at and near the Γ point , indicat ing an interfacial interaction that modifies the preferred spin 

alignment at the NiPS 3/WSe 2 interface. Such spin rearrangement provides a microscopic mechanism 

for the experimentally observed magnetic proximity effect .

3. Conclusions 

This work demonstrates rich excitonic and magnetic phenomena in few -layer NiPS 3/WSe 2 HSs. Low -

temperature μ-PL measurements reveal sharp, discret e emission bands that, together with their 

strong linear and spontaneous circular polarization , provide compelling evidence that localized 

intralayer WSe 2 excitons confined by an interfac ial potential experience a robust magnetic proximity 

effect arising from uncompensated spin s at the NiPS 3 interface . The nonlinear Zeeman splitting 

observed under applied magnetic fields is well described by a model incorporating an interfacial 

exchange field, with extracted exchange field strengths reaching several tesla . Complementary DFT 

calculations reveal a varying interfac ial potential due to the different atomic registry at the interface ,

significant int erfacial hybridization, modifications to the spin texture, and an enhanced degree of 

linear polarization when Ni 3d bands approach the WSe 2 conduction bands. These findings underscore 

the critical role of orbital overlap and spin -valley coupling at the NiP S3/WSe 2 interface and establish                  

> Figure 8.Isosurface of the probability
> density (|Ψ|2=10 −4)of the wave
> function for the CBM+10 at the point
> of mo nolayer WSe 2(bottom layer)
> interfaced with monolayer NiPS 3(upper
> layer), illustrating a finite probability for
> the state to be on the NiPS 3layer. In the
> upper layer, yellow, purple, and silver
> balls represent S, P, and Ni atoms,
> respectively; in the bottom layer, grey,
> and yellow balls represent W and Se
> atoms, respectively.

12 

th is system as a promising platform for engineering tunable valleytronic and chiral optoelectronic 

functionalities in 2D material systems. 13 

Methods 

NiPS 3. Bulk NiPS 3 single crystals were synthesized via chemical vapor trans port synthesis . Briefly, 

stoichiometric amounts of Ni, red phosphorus, and S8 were ground using a mortar and pestle to form 

a homogeneous mixture. The resulting powder was transferred to a quartz tube and sealed under 

vacuum. Then, the tube was placed in a two -zone gradient furnace and heated for one week, with the 

hot zone (substrate) maintained at 750 ˚C and the cold zone (product) at 690 ˚C. After the growth 

period, bulk NiPS 3 single crystals were collected from the cold zone. 

Device fabrication. Two types of NiPS 3/WSe 2 heterostructures ( Device 1 and Device 2 ) were fabricated 

using a PDMS -based dry transfer method inside a glovebox to prevent contamination and degradation. 

NiPS 3 crystals were synthesized via chemical vapor transport , as described above , while WSe 2 and hBN 

flakes were sourced from HQ Graphene. Si/S iO 2 substrates were sequentially cleaned with deionized 

water, acetone, and isopropanol, followed by dr ying with nitrogen gas. For Device 1 , thin flakes of 

hBN , Ni PS 3, and WSe 2 were mechanically exfoliated and sequentially stacked directly onto the clean 

Si/S iO 2 substrate, with hBN placed first, followed by Ni PS 3 and then W Se 2. For Device 2 , a Ti/Au 

( / nm) back electrode was patterned on the Si/S iO 2 substrate using electron b eam lithography and 

thermal evaporation prior to stacking. Ni PS 3 and W Se 2 flakes were then transferred in sequence - Ni PS 3

first, followed by WS e2 - onto the pre -patterned electrode. An hBN flake was transferred on top to 

encapsulate the stack using a poly carbonate (PC) film at 0 °C . The PC was subsequently removed by 

rinsing the device in chloroform. 

Raman measurements. Raman measurements (λ = nm) were performed using a itec Alpha 300 

micro -Raman instrument. The optical pathway was initially calibrated with a standard Si/SiO 2 sample, 

using a 100X (Numerical Aperture 0.9) objective and then the heterostructure sample was measured. 

Laser power of 5 mW was used with a grating of 1200/500, an integration time of 5 s and 20 

accumulations to get one spectrum. Spectra were obtained separately from the NiPS 3, WSe 2 and the 

NiPS 3/WSe 2 regions of the sample. 

P-SHG. Polarization -resolved second harmonic generation measurements were carrie d out using a 

commercial confocal microscope (Witec - Alpha 3000)  with a 0 nm laser and a 00× objective lens 

(NA 0.9). The laser power was set to 8.54 mW, with a 600 lines/mm grating, 2 -second integration time, 

and five accumulations per spectrum. The incident polarization was rotated from 0° to 360°, and the 

analyzer was rotated simultaneously with a fixed offset of 90°. All measurements were performed 

under ambient conditions. 

PL and magneto -PL. PL and magneto -PL measurements were conducted using a fiber -based confocal 

microscope integrated in a cryogenic system (attoDRY1000 closed cycle cryostat) equipped with a 

superconducting magnet and a heater capable of tuning the sample temperature between 5 K – 300 

K. Temperature control was maintain ed by using a Lake Shore PID system. The samples were excited 

with a 488 nm continuous -wave laser, and the emission was detected using a FERGIE spectrograph. A

495 nm long -pass dichroic mirror , installed on the optical head, was used to direct the laser ex citation 

to the sample while filtering the reflected laser from the emission signal . In addition, a 500 nm long -

pass filter was placed in the emission path to further suppress any residual laser signal . For 

polarization -resolved measurements, a linear polarize r was positioned in the emission path for linear 

polarization detection, while a linear polarizer combined with a quarter -wave plate (oriented at +45 

and -45 degrees to each other’s main axis for 𝜎 + and 𝜎 − detection , respectively ) was employed for 

circular polarization detection. 14 

DFT. To calculate the electronic structure of the NiPS 3/WSe 2 HS systems we used the all -electron FHI -

aims code. 63,69,70 The relaxations were performed using the PBE functional 71 on tigh t tier 1 numeric 

atom -centered orbitals, including the nonlocal many -body dispersion correction (MBD -nl) 72,73 and 

scalar relativistic corrections (ZORA), employing a Г-centered Monkhorst -Pack grids 74 of 30 ×18 ×11 for 

the rectangular supercell shown in Figure S 10 , which was created using the rectangular magnetic unit 

cell of NiPS 3 in its zi gzag magnetic configuration and a rectangular 3 ×2 supercell of WSe 2. This 

supercell leads to minimal strain in the NiPS 3 system ( ≈ −1.5% , using the WSe 2 lattice parameter )

while maintaining a reasonably small number of atoms. In the calculations for differe nt stackings, used 

to estimate the moiré potential, the k -point grids were reduced to 24 ×16 ×1. All systems were relaxed 

until the forces fell below 10 -4 eV Å -1, with the in -plane lattice fixed to match the relaxed WSe 2 bulk 

lattice ( 𝑎 ≈ 3.288 Å). All band structures were calculated using the SCAN 75 functional, including spin -

orbit coupling via a post -self -consistent approach 76 and an increased k -point grid of 48×30×1 .

Acknowledgments 

E.L., T. B., T.H. and D.N. thank the support from the Deutsch -Israel Program (DIP, Project No. 

NA1223/2 -1). E.L. thanks the Israel Science Foundation (ISF, Project No. 304/23 ). T.B. gratefully 

acknowledge the computing time made available to them on the high -perform ance computer at the 

NHR Center of TU Dresden and on the high -performance computers Noctua 2 at the NHR Center PC2. 

These are funded by the German Federal Ministry of Education and Research and the state 

governments participating based on the resolutions o f the GWK for the national high -performance 

computing at universities ( www.nhr -verein.de/unsere -partner ). T.B. thanks James Green from the 

Molecular Simulations from First Principles e.V. Berlin for fruitful discussions and his help with the spin 

texture calculations. T.W. acknowledges financial support from National Science Center, Poland under 

grant no. 2023/48/C/ST3/00309. T.W . gratefully acknowledges Poland's high -performance 

Infrastructure PLGrid (ACC Cyfronet AGH ) for providing computer facilities and support under 

computational grant no. PLG/2025/018073. N.C. acknowledges the Alexander von Humboldt 

foundation for the postdoctoral research fellowship. The authors thank Dr. Kusha Sharma for her 

editing assistance. 

Supporting Information 

Device characterization, Additional PL measurements , reproducibility of the NiPS 3/WSe 2 HS emission, 

magnetic proximity fit, I-V measurements, DFT calculations .15 

References 

(1) Žutić, I.; Matos -Abiague, A.; Scharf, B.; Dery, H.; Belashchenko, K. Proximitized Materials. 

Mater. Today 2019 , 22 , 85 –107. 

(2) Zhang, B.; Lu, P.; Tabrizian, R.; Feng, P. X. -L.; Wu, Y. 2D Magnetic Heterost ructures: 

Spintronics and Quantum Future. npj Spintron. 2024 , 2, 1 –10. 

(3) Choi, E. M.; Sim, K. I.; Burch, K. S.; Lee, Y. H. Emergent Multifunctional Magnetic Proximity in 

van Der Waals Layered Heterostructures. Adv. Sci. 2022 , 9, 1 –25. 

(4) Liu, Y.; Gao, Y.; Zhang, S.; He, J.; Yu, J.; Liu, Z. Valleytronics in Transition Metal 

Dichalcogenides Materials. Nano Res. 2019 , 12 , 2695 –2711. 

(5) Cao, T.; Wang, G.; Han, W.; Ye, H.; Zhu, C.; Shi, J.; Niu, Q.; Tan, P.; Wang, E.; Liu, B.; Feng, J. 

Valley -Selective Ci rcular Dichroism of Monolayer Molybdenum Disulphide. Nat. Commun. 

2012 , 3, 885 –887. 

(6) Wang, G.; Chernikov, A.; Glazov, M. M.; Heinz, T. F.; Marie, X.; Amand, T.; Urbaszek, B. 

Colloquium: Excitons in Atomically Thin Transition Metal Dichalcogenides. Rev. Mod. Phys. 

2018 , 90 , 1 –25. 

(7) Splendiani, A.; Sun, L.; Zhang, Y.; Li, T.; Kim, J.; Chim, C. Y.; Galli, G.; Wang, F. Emerging 

Photoluminescence in Monolayer MoS2. Nano Lett. 2010 , 10 , 1271 –1275. 

(8) He, K.; Kumar, N.; Zhao, L.; Wang, Z.; Mak, K. F.; Zha o, H.; Shan, J. Tightly Bound Excitons in 

Monolayer WSe2. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2014 , 113 , 1 –5. 

(9) Schutte, W. J.; De Boer, J. L.; Jellinek, F. Crystal Structures of Tungsten Disulfide and 

Diselenide. J. Solid State Chem. 1987 , 70 , 207 –209. 

(10) Xiao, D.; Li u, G. Bin; Feng, W.; Xu, X.; Yao, W. Coupled Spin and Valley Physics in Monolayers 

of MoS 2 and Other Group -VI Dichalcogenides. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2012 , 108 , 1 –5. 

(11) Li, Y.; Ludwig, J.; Low, T.; Chernikov, A.; Cui, X.; Arefe, G.; Kim, Y. D.; Zande, A. M. Van Der; 

Rigosi, A.; Hill, H. M.; Kim, S. H.; Hone, J.; Li, Z.; Smirnov, D.; Heinz, T. F. Valley Splitting and 

Polarization by the Zeeman Effect in Monolayer MoSe 2. 2014 , 266804 , 1 –5. 

(12) Stier, A. V.; Wilson, N. P.; Clark, G.; Xu, X.; Crooker, S. A. Pr obing the Influence of Dielectric 

Environment on Excitons in Monolayer WSe2: Insight from High Magnetic Fields. Nano Lett. 

2016 , 16 , 7054 –7060. 

(13) Zhao, C.; Norden, T.; Zhang, P.; Zhao, P.; Cheng, Y.; Sun, F.; Parry, J. P.; Taheri, P.; Wang, J.; 

Yang, Y .; Scrace, T.; Kang, K.; Yang, S.; Miao, G. X.; Sabirianov, R.; Kioseoglou, G.; Huang, W.; 

Petrou, A.; Zeng, H. Enhanced Valley Splitting in Monolayer WSe2 Due to Magnetic Exchange 

Field. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2017 , 12 , 757 –762. 

(14) Norden, T.; Zhao, C.; Zha ng, P.; Sabirianov, R.; Petrou, A.; Zeng, H. Giant Valley Splitting in 

Monolayer WS2 by Magnetic Proximity Effect. Nat. Commun. 2019 , 10 .

(15) Zhong, D.; Seyler, K. L.; Linpeng, X.; Cheng, R.; Sivadas, N.; Huang, B.; Schmidgall, E.; 

Taniguchi, T.; Watanabe, K.; McGuire, M. A.; Yao, W.; Xiao, D.; Fu, K. M. C.; Xu, X. Van Der 

Waals Engineering of Ferromagnetic Semiconductor Heterostructures for Spi n and 

Valleytronics. Sci. Adv. 2017 , 3, 1 –6. 

(16) Zhang, Q.; Yang, S. A.; Mi, W.; Cheng, Y.; Schwingenschlögl, U. Large Spin -Valley Polarization 

in Monolayer MoTe 2 on Top of EuO(111). Adv. Mater. 2016 , 28 , 959 –966. 16 

(17) Ho, C. H.; Hsu, T. Y.; Muhimmah, L. C. The Band -Edge Excitons Observed in Few -Layer NiPS3. 

npj 2D Mater. Appl. 2021 , 5.

(18) Wildes, A. R.; Simonet, V.; Ressouche, E.; McIntyre, G. J.; Avdeev, M.; Suard, E.; Kimber, S. A. 

J.; Lançon, D.; Pepe, G.; Moubara ki, B.; Hicks, T. J. Magnetic Structure of the Quasi -Two -

Dimensional Antiferromagnet NiPS3. Phys. Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 2015 , 92 , 1 –

11. 

(19) Joy, P. A.; Vasudevan, S. Magnetism in the Layered Transition -Metal Thiophosphates MPS3 

(M=Mn, Fe, and Ni). Phys. Rev. B 1992 , 46 , 5425 –5433. 

(20) Wang, X.; Cao, J.; Li, H.; Lu, Z.; Cohen, A.; Haldar, A.; Kitadai, H.; Tan, Q.; Burch, K. S.; Smirnov, 

D.; Xu, W.; Sharifzadeh, S.; Liang, L.; Ling, X. Electronic Raman Scattering in the 2D 

Antiferromagnet NiPS3. Sci. Adv. 2022 , 8, 1 –7. 

(21) Kang, S.; Kim, K.; Kim, B. H.; Kim, J.; Sim, K. I.; Lee, J. U.; Lee, S.; Park, K.; Yun, S.; Kim, T.; Nag, 

A.; Walters, A.; Garcia -Fernandez, M.; Li, J.; Chapon, L.; Zhou, K. J.; Son, Y. W.; Kim, J. H.; 

Cheong, H.; Park, J. G. Coherent Many -Body Exciton in van Der Waals Antiferromagnet NiPS3. 

Nature 2020 , 583 , 785 –789. 

(22) Kim, S. Y.; Kim, T. Y.; Sandilands, L. J.; Sinn, S.; Lee, M. C.; Son, J.; Lee, S.; Choi, K. Y.; Kim, W.; 

Park, B. G.; Jeon, C.; Kim, H. Do; Park, C. H.; Park, J. G.; Moon, S. J.; Noh, T. W. Charge -Spin 

Correlation in van Der Waals Antiferromagnet NiPS3. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2018 , 120 , 136402. 

(23) Hwangbo, K.; Zhang, Q.; Jiang, Q.; Wang, Y.; Fonseca, J.; Wang, C.; Diederich, G. M.; Gamelin, 

D. R.; Xiao, D .; Chu, J. H.; Yao, W.; Xu, X. Highly Anisotropic Excitons and Multiple Phonon 

Bound States in a van Der Waals Antiferromagnetic Insulator. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2021 , 16 ,

655 –660. 

(24) Jana, D.; Kapuscinski, P.; Mohelsky, I.; Vaclavkova, D.; Breslavetz, I.; Orlita, M.; Faugeras, C.; 

Potemski, M. Magnon Gap Excitations and Spin -Entangled Optical Transition in the van Der 

Waals Antiferromagnet NiPS3. Phys. Rev. B 2023 , 108 , 115149. 

(25) Song, F.; Lv, Y.; Sun, Y. J.; Pang, S.; Chang, H.; Guan, S.; Lai, J. M.; Wang, X. J.; Wu, B.; Hu, C.; 

Yuan, Z.; Zhang, J. Manipulation of Anisotropic Zhang -Rice Exciton in NiPS3 by Magnetic Field. 

Nat. Commun. 2024 , 15 , 1 –8. 

(26) Wang, X.; Cao, J.; Lu, Z. ; Cohen, A.; Kitadai, H.; Li, T.; Tan, Q.; Wilson, M.; Lui, C. H.; Smirnov, 

D.; Sharifzadeh, S.; Ling, X. Spin -Induced Linear Polarization of Photoluminescence in 

Antiferromagnetic van Der Waals Crystals. Nat. Mater. 2021 , 20 , 964 –970. 

(27) Muhammad, Z.; Szpakowski, J.; Abbas, G.; Zu, L.; Islam, R.; Wang, Y.; Wali, F.; Karmakar, A.; 

Molas, M. R.; Zhang, Y.; Zhu, L.; Zhao, W.; Zhang, H. Anisotropic Phonon and Magnon 

Vibration and Gate -Tunable Optoelectronic Properties of Nickel Thiophosphite. 2D Mater. 

2023 , 10 .

(28) Wang, X.; Tan, Q.; Li, T.; Lu, Z.; Cao, J.; Ge, Y.; Zhao, L.; Tang, J.; Kitadai, H.; Guo, M.; Li, Y. -M.; 

Xu, W.; Cheng, R.; Smirnov, D.; Ling, X. Unveiling the Spin Evolution in van Der Waals 

Antiferromagnets via Magneto -Exciton Effects. Nat. C ommun. 2024 , 15 , 8011. 

(29) Chen, S.; Huang, C.; Sun, H.; Ding, J.; Jena, P.; Kan, E. Boosting the Curie Temperature of Two -

Dimensional Semiconducting CrI3 Monolayer through van Der Waals Heterostructures. J. 

Phys. Chem. C 2019 , 123 , 17987 –17993. 

(30) Ta n, Q.; Luo, W.; Li, T.; Cao, J.; Kitadai, H.; Wang, X.; Ling, X. Charge -Transfer -Enhanced d – d

Emission in Antiferromagnetic NiPS3. Appl. Phys. Rev. 2022 , 9.17 

(31) Duan, J.; Chava, P.; Ghorbani -Asl, M.; Erb, D.; Hu, L.; Krasheninnikov, A. V.; Schneider, H .; 

Rebohle, L.; Erbe, A.; Helm, M.; Zeng, Y. J.; Zhou, S.; Prucnal, S. Enhanced Trion Emission in 

Monolayer MoSe2 by Constructing a Type -I Van Der Waals Heterostructure. Adv. Funct. 

Mater. 2021 , 31 , 1 –8. 

(32) Zhang, H.; Yang, W.; Ning, Y.; Xu, X. Abundant Valley -Polarized States in Two -Dimensional 

Ferromagnetic van Der Waals Heterostructures. Phys. Rev. B 2020 , 101 , 1 –9. 

(33) Liu, N.; Gallaro, C. M.; Shayan, K.; Mukherjee, A.; Kim, B.; Hone, J.; Vamivakas, N.; Strauf, S. 

Antiferromagnetic Proximity Coupling between Semiconductor Quantum Emitters in 

WSe2and van Der Waals Ferromagnets. Nanoscale 2021 , 13 , 832 –841. 

(34) Onga, M.; Sugita, Y.; Ideue, T.; Nakagawa, Y.; Suzuki, R.; Motome, Y.; Iwasa, Y. 

Antiferromagn et -Semiconductor van Der Waals Heterostructures: Interlayer Interplay of 

Exciton with Magnetic Ordering. (ArXiv:2005.10727v1 [Cond -Mat.Mtrl -Sci]). arXiv Mater. Sci. 

3.

(35) Serati de Brito, C.; Faria Junior, P. E.; Ghiasi, T. S.; Ingla -Aynés, J.; Rabahi, C. R.; Cavalini, C.; 

Dirnberger, F.; Mañas -Valero, S.; Watanabe, K.; Taniguchi, T.; Zollner, K.; Fabian, J.; Schüller, 

C.; van der Zant, H. S. J.; Gobato, Y. G. Charge Transfer and Asymmetric Coupling of MoSe2 

Valleys to the Magnetic Order of CrSBr. Nano L ett. 2023 , 23 , 11073 –11081. 

(36) Li, X.; Jones, A. C.; Choi, J.; Zhao, H.; Chandrasekaran, V.; Pettes, M. T.; Piryatinski, A.; 

Tschudin, M. A.; Reiser, P.; Broadway, D. A.; Maletinsky, P.; Sinitsyn, N.; Crooker, S. A.; Htoon, 

H. Proximity -Induced Chiral Q uantum Light Generation in Strain -Engineered WSe2/NiPS3 

Heterostructures. Nat. Mater. 2023 , 22 , 1311 –1316. 

(37) Tu, Z.; Zhou, T.; Ersevim, T.; Arachchige, H. S.; Hanbicki, A. T.; Friedman, A. L.; Mandrus, D.; 

Ouyang, M.; Autić, I.; Gong, C. Spin -Orbit Cou pling Proximity Effect in 

MoS2/Fe3GeTe2heterostructures. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2022 , 120 .

(38) Qi, J.; Li, X.; Niu, Q.; Feng, J. Giant and Tunable Valley Degeneracy Splitting in MoTe2. Phys. 

Rev. B - Condens. Matter Mater. Phys. 2015 , 92 , 1 –5. 

(39) Zhong, D. ; Seyler, K. L.; Linpeng, X.; Wilson, N. P.; Taniguchi, T.; Watanabe, K.; McGuire, M. A.; 

Fu, K. M. C.; Xiao, D.; Yao, W.; Xu, X. Layer -Resolved Magnetic Proximity Effect in van Der 

Waals Heterostructures. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2020 , 15 , 187 –191. 

(40) Scharf, B.; Xu, G.; Matos -Abiague, A.; Žutić, I. Magnetic Proximity Effects in Transition -Metal 

Dichalcogenides: Converting Excitons. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2017 , 119 , 1 –6. 

(41) Hu, T.; Zhao, G.; Gao, H.; Wu, Y.; Hong, J.; Stroppa, A.; Ren, W. Manipulation of Valley 

Pseudospin in WSe2/CrI3 Heterostructures by the Magnetic Proximity Effect. Phys. Rev. B 

2020 , 101 , 1 –7. 

(42) Gong, C.; Zhang, P.; Norden, T.; Li, Q.; Guo, Z.; Chaturv edi, A.; Najafi, A.; Lan, S.; Liu, X.; Wang, 

Y.; Gong, S. -J.; Zeng, H.; Zhang, H.; Petrou, A.; Zhang, X. Ferromagnetism Emerged from Non -

Ferromagnetic Atomic Crystals. Nat. Commun. 2023 , 14 , 3839. 

(43) Kuo, C. T.; Neumann, M.; Balamurugan, K.; Park, H. J.; Kang, S.; Shiu, H. W.; Kang, J. H.; Hong, 

B. H.; Han, M.; Noh, T. W.; Park, J. G. Exfoliation and Raman Spectroscopic Fingerprint of Few -

Layer NiPS 3 Van Der Waals Crystals. Sci. Rep. 2016 , 6, 1 –10. 

(4 4) del Corro, E.; Terrones, H.; Elias, A.; Fantini, C.; Feng, S.; Nguyen, M. A.; Mallouk, T. E.; 

Terrones, M.; Pimenta, M. A. Excited Excitonic States in 1L, 2L, 3L, and Bulk WSe 2 Observed 

by Resonant Raman Spectroscopy. ACS Nano 2014 , 8, 9629 –9635. 18 

(45) Chu, H.; Roh, C. J.; Island, J. O.; Li, C.; Lee, S.; Chen, J.; Park, J. G.; Young, A. F.; Lee, J. S.; Hsieh, 

D. Linear Magnetoelectric Phase in Ultrathin MnPS3 Probed by Optical Second Harmonic 

Generation. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2020 , 124 , 27601. 

(46) Ribeiro -Soares, J.; Janisch, C.; Liu, Z.; El í as, A. L.; Dresselhaus, M. S.; Terrones, M.; Cançado, L. 

G.; Jorio, A. Second Harmonic Generation in WSe2. 2D Mater. 2015 , 2, 045015. 

(47) Dirnberger, F.; Bushati, R.; Datta, B.; Kumar, A.; MacDonald, A. H.; Baldini, E.; Menon, V. M. 

Spin -Correlated Exciton –Polaritons in a van Der Waals Magnet. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2022 , 17 ,

1060 –1064. 

(48) Zhao, W.; Ribeiro, R. M.; Toh, M.; Carvalho, A.; Kloc, C.; Castro Neto, A. H.; Eda, G. Origin of 

Indirect Optical Transitions in Fe w-Layer MoS2, WS2, and WSe2. Nano Lett. 2013 , 13 , 5627 –

5634. 

(49) Jeong, T. Y.; Jin, B. M.; Rhim, S. H.; Debbichi, L.; Park, J.; Jang, Y. D.; Lee, H. R.; Chae, D. H.; 

Lee, D.; Kim, Y. H.; Jung, S.; Yee, K. J. Coherent Lattice Vibrations in Mono - and Few -Layer 

WSe2. ACS Nano 2016 , 10 , 5560 –5566. 

(50) He, Y. M.; Clark, G.; Schaibley, J. R.; He, Y.; Chen, M. C.; Wei, Y. J.; Ding, X.; Zhang, Q.; Yao, W.; 

Xu, X.; Lu, C. Y.; Pan, J. W. Single Quantum Emitters in Monolayer Semiconductors. Nat. 

Nanotechnol. 2015 , 10 , 497 –502. 

(51) Seyler, K. L.; Rivera, P.; Yu, H.; Wilson, N. P.; Ray, E. L.; Mandrus, D. G.; Yan, J.; Yao, W.; Xu, X. 

Signatures of Moiré -Trapped Valley Excitons in MoSe2/WSe2 Heterobilayers. Nature 2019 ,

567 , 66 –70. 

(52) Tonndorf, P.; Schmidt, R.; Schneider, R.; Kern, J.; Buscema, M.; Steele, G. A.; Castellanos -

Gomez, A.; van der Zant, H. S. J.; Michaelis de Vasconcellos, S.; Bratschitsch, R. Single -Photon 

Emission from Localized Excitons in an Atomically Thin Semiconductor. Optica 2015 , 2, 347. 

(53 ) Linhart, L.; Paur, M.; Smejkal, V.; Burgdörfer, J.; Mueller, T.; Libisch, F. Localized Intervalley 

Defect Excitons as Single -Photon Emitters in WSe2. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2019 , 123 , 146401. 

(54) Wu, B.; Zheng, H.; Li, S.; Ding, J.; He, J.; Zeng, Y.; Chen, K.; Liu, Z.; Chen, S.; Pan, A.; Liu, Y. 

Evidence for Moiré Intralayer Excitons in Twisted WSe2/WSe2 Homobilayer Superlattices. 

Light Sci. Appl. 2022 , 11 .

(55) Parto, K.; Azzam, S. I.; Banerjee, K.; Moody, G. Defect and Strain Engineering of Monolayer 

WSe2 Enables Site -Controlled Single -Photon Emission up to 150 K. Nat. Commun. 2021 , 12 ,

1–8. 

(56) Rivera, P.; Yu, H.; Seyler, K. L.; Wilson, N. P.; Yao, W.; Xu, X. Interlayer Valley Excitons in 

Heterobilayers of Transition Metal Dichalcogenides. Nat. Nanotech nol. 2018 , 13 , 1004 –1015. 

(57) Zeng, H.; Liu, G. Bin; Dai, J.; Yan, Y.; Zhu, B.; He, R.; Xie, L.; Xu, S.; Chen, X.; Yao, W.; Cui, X. 

Optical Signature of Symmetry Variations and Spin -Valley Coupling in Atomically Thin 

Tungsten Dichalcogenides. Sci. Rep. 2013 , 3, 2 –6. 

(58) Huang, J.; Hoang, T. B.; Mikkelsen, M. H. Probing the Origin of Excitonic States in Monolayer 

WSe2. Sci. Rep. 2016 , 6, 1 –7. 

(59) Lin, B. H.; Chao, Y. C.; Hsieh, I.; Chuu, C. P.; Lee, C. J.; Chu, F. H.; Lu, L. S.; Hsu, W. T.; Pao, C. 

W.; Shih, C. K.; Su, J. J.; Chang, W. H. Remarkably Deep Moiré Potential for Intralayer Excitons 

in MoSe2/MoS2 Twisted Heterobilayers. Nano Lett. 2023 , 23 , 1306 –1312. 

(60) Abramov, A. N.; Chestnov, I. Y.; Alimova, E. S.; Ivanova, T.; Mukhin, I. S.; Krizhanovskii, D. N.; 

Shelykh, I. A.; Iorsh, I. V.; Kravtsov, V. Photoluminescence Imaging of Single Photon Emitters 19 

within Nanoscale Strain Profiles in Monol ayer WSe2. Nat. Commun. 2023 , 14 , 1 –7. 

(61) Dong, X. J.; Jia, K.; Ji, W. X.; Li, S. S.; Zhang, C. W. Valleytronics Candidate with Spontaneous 

Valley Polarization in A -Type Antiferromagnetic MoSi2N4/MnPS3 Heterostructure. ACS Appl. 

Electron. Mater. 2023 , 5, 2046 –2054. 

(62) Blum, V.; Gehrke, R.; Hanke, F.; Havu, P.; Havu, V.; Ren, X.; Reuter, K.; Scheffler, M. Ab Initio 

Molecular Simulations with Numeric Atom -Centered Orbitals. Comput. Phys. Commun. 2009 ,

180 , 2175 –2196. 

(63) Yu, V. W. zhe; Corsetti, F.; G arcía, A.; Huhn, W. P.; Jacquelin, M.; Jia, W.; Lange, B.; Lin, L.; Lu, 

J.; Mi, W.; Seifitokaldani, A.; Vázquez -Mayagoitia, Á.; Yang, C.; Yang, H.; Blum, V. ELSI: A 

Unified Software Interface for Kohn –Sham Electronic Structure Solvers. Comput. Phys. 

Commun . 2018 , 222 , 267 –285. 

(64) Havu, V.; Blum, V.; Havu, P.; Scheffler, M. Efficient O (N) Integration for All -Electron Electronic 

Structure Calculation Using Numeric Basis Functions. J. Comput. Phys. 2009 , 228 , 8367 –8379. 

(65) Van Der Zande, A. M.; Kunstman n, J.; Chernikov, A.; Chenet, D. A.; You, Y.; Zhang, X.; Huang, 

P. Y.; Berkelbach, T. C.; Wang, L.; Zhang, F.; Hybertsen, M. S.; Muller, D. A.; Reichman, D. R.; 

Heinz, T. F.; Hone, J. C. Tailoring the Electronic Structure in Bilayer Molybdenum Disulfide vi a

Interlayer Twist. Nano Lett. 2014 , 14 , 3869 –3875. 

(66) Tran, K.; Moody, G.; Wu, F.; Lu, X.; Choi, J.; Kim, K.; Rai, A.; Sanchez, D. A.; Quan, J.; Singh, A.; 

Embley, J.; Zepeda, A.; Campbell, M.; Autry, T.; Taniguchi, T.; Watanabe, K.; Lu, N.; Banerjee, 

S. K.; Silverman, K. L.; Kim, S.; Tutuc, E.; Yang, L.; MacDonald, A. H.; Li, X. Evidence for Moiré 

Excitons in van Der Waals Heterostructures. Nature 2019 , 567 , 71 –75. 

(67) He, W.; Shen, Y.; Wohlfeld, K.; Sears, J.; Li, J.; Pelliciari, J.; Walicki, M.; Jo hnston, S.; Baldini, E.; 

Bisogni, V.; Mitrano, M.; Dean, M. P. M. Magnetically Propagating und’s Exciton in van Der 

Waals Antiferromagnet NiPS3. Nat. Commun. 2024 , 15 , 1 –8. 

(68) oźniak, T.; Faria Junior, P. E.; Seifert, G.; Chaves, A.; Kunstmann, J. Exciton g Factors of van 

Der Waals Heterostructures from First -Principles Calculations. Phys. Rev. B 2020 , 101 , 1 –11. 

(69) Blum, V.; Gehrke, R.; Hanke, F.; Havu, P.; Havu, V.; Ren, X .; Reuter, K.; Scheffler, M. Ab Initio 

Molecular Simulations with Numeric Atom -Centered Orbitals. Comput. Phys. Commun. 2009 ,

180 , 2175 –2196. 

(70) Havu, V.; Blum, V.; Havu, P.; Scheffler, M. Efficient O (N) Integration for All -Electron Electronic 

Structure Calculation Using Numeric Basis Functions. J. Comput. Phys. 2009 , 228 , 8367 –8379. 

(71) Perdew, J. P.; Burke, K.; Ernzerhof, M. Generalized Gradie nt Approximation Made Simple. 

Phys. Rev. Lett. 1997 , 78 , 1396 –1396. 

(72) Tkatchenko, A.; Ambrosetti, A.; Distasio, R. A. Interatomic Methods for the Dispersion Energy 

Derived from the Adiabatic Connection Fluctuation -Dissipation Theorem. J. Chem. Phys. 20 13 ,

138 .

(73) Hermann, J.; Tkatchenko, A. Density Functional Model for van Der Waals Interactions: 

Unifying Many -Body Atomic Approaches with Nonlocal Functionals. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2020 ,

124 , 146401. 

(74) Pack, J. D.; Monkhorst, H. J. Special Points for B rillouin -Zone Integrations. Phys. Rev. B 1977 ,

16 , 1748 –1749. 

(75) Sun, J.; Ruzsinszky, A.; Perdew, J. Strongly Constrained and Appropriately Normed Semilocal 

Density Functional. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2015 , 115 , 1 –6. 20 

(76) Huhn, W. P.; Blum, V. One -Hundred -Three Compound Band -Structure Benchmark of Post -

Self -Consistent Spin -Orbit Coupling Treatments in Density Functional Theory. Phys. Rev. 

Mater. 2017 , 1, 1 –18. 21 

# Supporting Information 

# Localized Exciton Emission with Spontaneous Circular Polarization in 

# NiPS 3/WSe 2 Heterostructures 

Adi Harchol 1, Shahar Zuri 1, Rajesh Kumar Yadav 2, Nirman Chakraborty 1,3 , Idan Cohen 1, Tomasz 

Wo źniak 4, Thomas Brumme 5, Thomas Heine 5,6,7 *, Doron Nave h2* and Efrat Lifshitz 1*  

> 8.

Schulich Faculty of Chemistry, Solid State Institute, Russell Berrie Nanotechnology Institute, Helen Diller Quantum 

Information Center, Technion, Haifa 3200003, Israel  

> 9.

Faculty of Engineering, Institute for Nanotechnology and Advanced Materials , Bar -Ilan University, Ramat -Gan 

52900, Israel.  

> 10.

Eduard Zintl Institute of Inorganic and Physical Chemistry, Technical University of Darmstadt, 64287 Darmstadt, 

Germany  

> 11.

University of Warsaw, Faculty of Physics, 02 -093 Warsaw, Poland  

> 12.

Faculty of Chemistry and Food Chemistry, Technische Universität Dresden, 01062 Dresden, Germany . 

> 13.

Helmholtz -Zentrum Dresden -Rossendorf, Center for Advanced Systems Understand ing, CASUS, Untermarkt 20, 

02826 Görlitz, Germany . 

> 14.

Department of Chemistry and ibs for Nanomedicine, Yonsei University, Seodaemun -gu, Seoul, 120 -749 South 

Korea .22 

1. Device Characterization 

Figure S1a and S1b display optical image s of Device 1 and Device 2 (left panels), respectively, alongside 

atomic force microscopy (AFM) height profiles (right panels) taken along the black dashed lines 

indicated in the optical images. In Device 1 , the WSe 2 thickness is measured to be ~24.7 nm, 

corresponding to 3 5 layers, While in Device 2 , the WSe 2 flake is ~7.2 nm thick , corresponding to 10 

layers .1 The NiPS 3 thickness is ~55.4 nm in Device 1 and ~156.5 nm in Device 2, corresponding to ~84 

and ~237 layers , respectively .2

Figure S1 c presents the Raman spectra of Device 1 , acquired from three different regions: exposed 

NiPS 3 (red curve), exposed WSe 2 (blue curve), and the overlapping NiPS 3/WSe 2 heterostructure region 

(green curve). The spectra from the exposed NiPS 3 and WSe 2 regions show good agreement with 

previously reported Raman signatures of these materials .2,3 Similar to the observations for Device 2 

described in the main text ( Figure 2b ), the Ram an spectrum recorded from the overlapping 

NiPS 3/WSe 2 region is dominated by the characteristic modes of WSe 2. In addition, two weaker modes, 

highlighted with asterisks, are observed and can be attributed to vibrational modes of NiPS 3. The 

presence of both WSe 2 and NiPS 3 Raman features confirms the successful assembly of the 

heterostructure in this region. 

1.1. Strain Analysis by Raman Spectroscopy 

The absence of strain in the heterostructures was further confirmed through Raman spectroscopy by 

showing that the primary vibrational modes of WSe 2 in the heterostructure regions do not deviate 

from those measured in the exposed WSe 2 areas and are consistent with previously reported values 

for unstrained crystals . Raman spectra acquired from both the exposed W Se 2 and the Ni PS 3/W Se 2

regions in Devices 1 and 2 were fitted using Lorentzian functions ( Figure S2 ), and the extracted peak 

positions are summarized in Table S1 . The results reveal that the Raman peaks of W Se 2 in the                

> Figure S1 .a, b .Optical images of Device 1(a, left) and Device 2 (b, left), each
> with a corresponding AFM height profile (right) taken along the black dashed
> line in the optical image. c. Raman spectra of Device 1recorded at three
> different locations on top of the sample: exposed NiPS 3, exposed WSe 2, and
> NiPS 3/WSe 2heter ostructure (from top to bottom), measured under 532 nm
> laser excitation at room temperature.

# a

# b

# c23 

heterostructures exhibit no appreciable s pectral shifts relative to their exposed counterparts. In 

addition, the narrow linewidths observed in all spectra are indicative of high crystalline quality and 

minimal disorde r. 

Raman mode 

Reported 

frequency 

(cm -1)*

This work 

Device 1 

This work 

Device 2 

WSe 2 HS1  WSe 2 HS2 

𝐸 ′ 250  250.6  249.6  249.9  250 

𝐴 1 

> ′

260  260.1  259.7  259.2  258.5 

> *

Ref. 4

Table S1. Extracted peak positions from Lorentzian -fitted Raman spectra of the 

exposed WSe 2 and the NiPS 3/WSe 2 regions, in Device 1 and Device 2 . Reported 

values for unstrained WSe 2 is also included for comparison .E

A

E

A

E

A

E

A

> Device
> Se
> Device
> S
> Device
> Se
> Device
> S

Figure S 2. Fitted Raman spectra of the  a,c.  exposed WSe 2 region and the  b,d.  NiPS 3/WSe 2 region for  Device 

1 (a,b)  and  Device 2  (c,d) .

# a b

# c d24 

1.2. Polarized Second Harmonic Generation (P -SHG) Fitting 

The fitting expression for SHG in WSe 2 is determined by its non -centrosymmetric crystal structure and 

threefold rotational symmetry. For unstrained WSe 2, the SHG intensity as a function of polarization 

angle ( 𝜃 ) follows the equation :5

𝐼 (2𝜔 , 𝜃 ) = cos 2(3𝜃 − 𝜙 )

Where 𝜙 is the phase offset, reflecting crystal orientation. 

In contrast, NiPS 3 belongs to the centrosymmetric point group 2/m , and its SHG response arises from 

electric quadrupole contribution s. The fitting expression , adopted from Ref. 6 for parallel polarization 

geometry , is:

𝐼 (2𝜔 , 𝜃 ) ∝ [(𝜒 𝑥𝑦𝑧𝑦 + 𝜒 𝑦𝑥𝑧𝑦 + 𝜒 𝑦𝑦𝑧𝑥 ) cos 2𝜃 sin 𝜃 + 𝜒 𝑥𝑥𝑧𝑥 sin 3 𝜃 ]2

Where 𝜒 𝑖𝑗𝑘𝑙 are components of the electric qua drupole susceptibility tensor associated with the 2/m 

crystallographic symmetry of NiPS 3.25 

2. Additional PL Measurements 

2.1. PL Measurement of WSe 2

The PL of the exposed WSe 2 in Device 1 was measured under identical conditions as the HS1 

measurements ( 4 K and same laser power) . As shown in Figure S 3, no detectable PL signal was 

observed, confirming that the emission from the HSs originates from the interface .    

> Figure S 3.PL measurements of the exposed WSe 2(blue) and the HS1 (green) regions at 4K.

26 

2.2. Temperature -Depende nt Photoluminescent Measurements of HS1 and HS2 

Figures S 4a and S4b show color maps of the temperature -dependent photoluminescent (PL) spectra 

of HS1 and HS2, respectively. In both heterostructures, the PL is strongly quenched at temperatures 

above 50 K. The dominant emission line at 1.56 eV (p1 in HS1 and p6 in HS2) was fitted at each 

temperature using a Gaussian line -shape and the extracted parameters - peak energy, full width at 

half maximum (FWHM), and i ntegrated intensity - are plotted in Figures S 4c and S4d for HS1 and HS2, 

respectively. The resulting trends were well described by established models for exciton behavior in 

semiconductors (red curves in Figures S 4c,d ). 

The PL intensity as a function of temperature follows the Arrhenius equation: 7

𝐼 (𝑇 ) = 𝐼 0

1 + 𝑎 ∙ exp (− 𝐸 𝑎 

𝑘 𝐵 𝑇 )

where 𝐼 0 is the low -temperature PL intensity, 𝑎 is the ratio of radiative to non -radiative decay rates, 

𝐸 𝑎 is the activation energy, and 𝑘 𝐵 is the Boltzmann constant. 

The temperature -depend ent of the FWHM is governed by exciton -phonon interactions and follows: 8

𝐹𝑊𝐻𝑀 (𝑇 ) = 𝛤 0 + 𝛤 𝐿𝑂 

> exp (𝐸 𝐿𝑂
> 𝑘 𝐵 𝑇 )−1

where 𝛤 0 is the broadening at 0 K, and 𝛤 𝐿𝑂 reflects the broadening produced by optical phonons with 

energy 𝐸 𝐿𝑂 .

Final ly, the temperature -dependent shift of the emission energy is described by the Varshni relation: 9

𝐸 𝑔𝑎𝑝 (𝑇 ) = 𝐸 0 − 𝛼 𝑇 2

𝑇 + 𝛽 

where 𝐸 0 is zero -temperature bandgap, and 𝛼 and 𝛽 are constants. The extracted fitting parameters 

for both heterostructures are summarized in Table S 2.

Fit parameter  p1 (HS1)  p6 (HS2) 

Integrated PL intensity  𝒂  89.8 ±24.4  449.7 ±91.8 

𝑬 𝒂  15.1 ±1.0 [meV]  16.9 ±0.6 [meV] 

FWHM 

𝜞 𝟎  2.2±0.5 [meV]  1.8 ±0.2 [meV] 

𝜞 𝑳𝑶  9.5 ±1.9 [meV]  4.9±0.6 [meV] 

𝑬 𝑳𝑶  5.9±0.7 [meV]  4.3±0.3 [meV] 

Energy shift  𝜶  1.1x10 -3±0.1 x10 -3

[eV ·T-1]

4.3x10 -4±0.3 x10 -4

[eV ·T-1]

𝜷  388 ±50 [T]  400 ±31 [T]     

> Table S2.Extracted fit ting parameters from temperature -dependent PL analysis of HS1 and HS2, based on
> exciton models for intensity quenching, linewidth broadening, and bandgap shift.

27 

# cp p

p p

Figure S 4. Temperature -dependent PL color map of  a.  HS1 and  b.  HS2, measured under 480 nm laser 

excitation. Panels  c, and  d show, from top to bottom, the integrated PL intensity, FWHM, and emission 

energy shift as a function of temperature for peaks p1 and p6, respectively, extracted from Gaussian fits 

to the tempera ture -dependent spectra. The red lines represent fits based on exciton behavior models in 

semiconductors. 

# a b

# d28 

2.3. Linear Polarization of HS1 

Figure S5a ,b present PL spectra of HS1 at different polarizer angles. As seen in Figure S5a , the emission 

peaks in the HS exhibit pronounced linear polariz ation . Figure S5b focus es on the spectral region near 

the NiPS 3 exciton at 1.476 eV. No clear polarization dependance is observed for this peak, which we 

attribute to its weak emission signal in the heterostructure, rendering it indistinguis hable from the 

background noise .

2.4. Calibration of the circular polarization detection 

To verify that the circular polarization detected in the 

NiPS 3/WSe 2 heterostructures does not originate from 

instrumental artifacts, a control measurement was 

performed on bare NiPS 3. The PL emission of NiPS 3 is 

known to exhibit strong linear polarization while 

showing negligible circular polarization. Figure S6 

presents the circularly resolved PL spectra measured 

from the bare NiPS 3 region under the same optical 

configuration used for the heterostructures. The σ⁺ 

and σ⁻ components overlap, resulting in a negligible 

degree of circular polarization. This result confirms 

tha t the polarization detection path does not 

introduce artificial circular polarization and validates 

the reliability of the circular polarization 

measurements presented in the main text. 

# a b        

> Figure S 5.a. Polarization -resolved PL color map of HS1. b. PL spectra of HS1 at different polarizer angles, focusing
> on the spectral window around 1.476 eV.
> Figure S6.Circularly resolved PL
> spectra measured from bare NiPS 3.

29 

2.5. Circularly Polarized PL at Different Locations for HS1 and HS2 

Figure S 7a and S7b show circularly polarized PL spectra acquired at different locations and on different 

days for HS1 and HS2, respectively. The emission spectra are relatively uniform across all spots, with 

small variations in peak intensity. In addition, the degree of circular polarization is preserved across 

different measurement spots, indicating that the emission does not originate from localized defects.       

> Figure S 7.Circularly polarized PL spectra of a. HS1 and b. HS2 acquired at different days and spots on top
> of the HSs.

# a b30 

3. Reproducibility of the NiPS 3/WSe 2 HS Emission – HS3 and HS4 

Figure S 8a and S8b show optical microscope image s of two additional NiPS 3/WSe 2 heterostructure ,

HS3 and HS4, respectively . The PL spectrum of HS3, acquired at 5 K (Figure S 8b), reveals a sharp 

emission line at 1.56 eV and an additional peak at 1.476 eV attributed to NiPS 3. This 1.56 eV emission 

line is quenched above 30 K, as shown in Figure S 8e. Figure S8d presents polarization -resolved PL 

spectra of HS4 at 5 K and 0 T , showing the same emission at 1.56 eV with substantial DCP ( ~40%) at 

zero magnetic field. This emission is also quenched above 30 K , as demonstrated in Figure S 8f. The 

presence of this st rong 1.56 eV peak , nonzero DCP at B= 0 T , and its temperature -dependent trend 

across multiple independent devices (HS1 -HS4) further supports the reproducibility and reliability of 

the optical response in the NiPS 3/WSe 2 heterostructures presented in this wor k.

4. Magnetic Proximity Fit 

For a ferromagnet with localized spin -½ ensemble in an external magnetic field B at temperature T,

the equilibrium magnetization , 𝑀 (𝐵 , 𝑇 ), is given by :10 

(1) 𝑀 (𝐵 , 𝑇 ) = 𝑁 𝜇 𝐵 tanh (𝜇 𝐵 𝐵 

> 𝑘 𝐵 𝑇

) = 𝑀 𝑠 tanh ( 𝐵 

> 𝐵 0

)

Where N is the total number of spin moments in the sample, 𝜇 𝐵 is th e Bohr magneton, and 𝑘 𝐵 is the 

Boltzmann constant .

Here, 

𝑀 𝑠 = 𝑁 𝜇 𝐵 is the saturation magnetization.                  

> Figure S 8.Optical microscope images of a. HS3 and b. HS4. The red and blue dashed lines indicate the boundaries of the
> NiPS 3and WSe 2flakes, respectively. PL spectra of the overlapping NiPS 3/WSe 2region in c. HS3 and d. HS4 acquired at 5
> K under 480 nm laser excitation. For HS4 ( d), the PL was measured under circular polarization detection at 0 T.
> Temperature -dependent PL color maps of e. HS3 and f. HS4.

# a

# b

# c

# d

# e

# f31 

𝐵 0 = 𝑘 𝐵 𝑇 

> 𝜇 𝐵

is the characteristic field scale set by the thermal fluctuation s.

Eq uation 1 reflects the behavior where the magnetization increases linearly with B at low fields and 

saturates at high fields. 

When m agnetic proximity effect s are considered, an effective exchange field (𝐵 𝑒𝑥  

> ∗

) proportional to the 

substrate magnetization is introduced ,11,12 such that :

(2) 𝐵 𝑒𝑥  

> ∗

= 𝐵 𝑒𝑥𝑐 tanh ( 𝐵 

> 𝐵 0

)

Where 𝐵 𝑒𝑥𝑐 is the saturated exchange field , analogous to 𝑀 𝑠 for the magnetization. 

Thus, the total effective field acting on an exciton in the 2D material is the sum of the external field 

and the exchange field contribution: 

(3) 𝐵 𝑡𝑜𝑡 (𝐵 ) = 𝐵 + 𝐵 𝑒𝑥  

> ∗

= 𝐵 + 𝐵 𝑒𝑥𝑐 tan ( 𝐵 

> 𝐵 0

)

Accordingly , f or carriers with an effective g-factor , 𝑔 𝑒𝑓𝑓 , the total Zeeman splitti ng ∆𝐸 (𝐵 ), becomes :

(4) ∆𝐸 (𝐵 ) = 𝑔 𝑒𝑓𝑓 𝜇 𝐵 𝐵 𝑡𝑜𝑡 → ∆𝐸 (𝐵 ) = 𝑔 𝑒𝑓𝑓 𝜇 𝐵 [𝐵 + 𝐵 𝑒𝑥𝑐 tan ( 𝐵 

> 𝐵 0

)]

4.1. Exchange Fit for p4 and p5 Peaks in HS1 

Figure S 9 presents the energy splitting of the p4 (top) 

and p5 (bottom) exciton peaks in HS1 as a function of 

magnetic field. Both features exhibit nonlinear 

Zeeman behavior similar to that observed for the p1 

peak . The energy splitting was fitted using the 

exchange model described by Equation (2) in the main 

text, and the extracted parameters Bexc and B0 are 

indicated within the plots. The similarity of these 

parameters to those extracted for p1 supports a 

common origin for all three excitonic states.   

> Figure S9.Energy splitting of the p4
> (top) and p5 (bottom) peaks in HS1 as
> a function of magnetic field, along
> with fits to the exchange equation
> described in the main text.

32 

5. I-V measurements 

Current -voltage (I -V) measurements were performed at room temperature under vacuum conditions 

(~10 -5 Torr) using a Keysight B2919 source -measure unit . Figure S 10 presents the I -V measurement of 

the NiPS 3/WSe 2 heterostructure in Device 2 , exhibiting a clear rectifying behavior - characterized by 

suppressed current under reverse bias and nonlinear increase under forward bias. This asymmetry is 

consistent with the formation of a p -n junction at the NiPS 3/WSe 2 interface and supports the existence 

of a built -in electric field.      

> Figure S10 .Current -voltage characteristics of the NiPS 3/WSe 2heterostructure in Device 2 , measured at room
> temperature under vacuum.

33 

6. Density -Function Theory Calculations 

In order to calculate the electronic structure of the NiPS 3/WSe 2 heterostructure systems we used the 

all -electron FHI -aims code. 13 –15 The relaxations were performed using the PBE functional 16 on tight tier 

1 numeric atom -centered orbitals, including the nonlocal many -body dispersion correction (MBD -

nl) 17,18 and scalar re lativistic corrections (ZORA) , employing Г -centered Monkhorst -Pack grids 19 of 

30 ×18×11 for the rectangular supercell shown in Figure S 11, which was created using the rectangular 

magnetic unit cell of NiPS 3 in its zigzag magnetic configuration and a rectangular 3 ×2 supercell of 

WSe 2. This supercell leads to minimal strain in the NiPS 3 system ( ≈ −1.5% , using the WSe 2 lattice 

parameter ) while maintaining a reasonably small number of atoms. In the calculations for different 

stackings , used to estimate the moiré potential , the k -point grids were reduced to 24 ×16×1. All 

systems were relaxed until the forces fell below 10 -4 eV Å -1, with the in -plane lattice fixed to match the 

relaxed WSe 2 bulk lattice ( 𝑎 ≈ 3.288 Å). All b and structures were calculated using the SCAN 20 

functional , including spin -orbit coupling via a post -self -consistent approach 21 and an increase d k-point 

grid of 48 ×30 ×1.

Figure S 12 shows the resulting band structures for the monolayer WSe 2/monolayer NiPS 3 and bilayer 

WSe 2/monolayer NiPS 3 systems , both with and without external electric field. One can clearly see that 

under small negative fields , the Ni 3d states shift s toward the WSe 2 conduction band , leading to 

hybridiz ation /overlap between the Ni 3d states and the WSe 2 conduction bands . This effect also occurs 

in the bilayer WSe 2/monolayer NiPS 3 system ; however , an additional splitting appears, coming from 

the different potential felt by the layers of WSe 2. Th e hybridization complicate s the comparison of the 

2D plots of the momentum matrix elements ( MMEs ), which are always calculated between one 

specific pair of initial and final state s. In the monolayer/monolayer system , for example, the tungsten -

based conduction band minimum + 1 (CBM +1 ) at the  point (corresponding to the backfolded K point 

of the unit cell ) actually crosses other bands in the vicinity of the  point . Thus, the highest 

co ntribution s for the MME s are expected for spin -allowed transition from the same initial state 

(valence band maximum (VBM) – #1216) to a set of different final states. Yet, before discussing the 

MMEs and the degree of circular and linear polarization (DCP/DLP ), we disscuss the interface potential 

in Figure S 13.    

> Figure S 11.Top -view (a)and side -view ( b) of the bilayer WSe 2/monolayer NiPS 3heterostructure. Green, dark grey,
> light grey, rose, and yellow spheres represent Se, W, Ni, P, and S atoms, respectively. The unit cell is indicated by grey
> lines, and the directions of the lattice vectors are shown in the upper left corner of each panel .

# a b34 

The interface potential shown in Figure S 13 was calculated for the lowest intralayer WSe 2 transition 

without an additional external electric field, corresponding to the system presented in Figure S 12c.

Since the NiPS 3 lattice parameter is about twice that of WSe 2, the two layers do not align perfectly, 

and there is always one Se atom nearly positioned on -top an S atom. As a result , the structural changes 

are minor , and the small variations observed in the intralayer gap of WSe 2 are mainly attributed to 

chang es in hybridization . The application of a small finite electric field does not signif icantly affect this 

gap , as can also be seen by comparing the left -hand with the right -hand panels in Figure S12.

Figure S 12. Band structures of the monolayer WSe 2/monolayer NiPS 3 heterostructure  a. without external electric field 

and  b. with a finite electric field of  -0.25 eV  Å-1, and the bilayer WSe 2/monolayer NiPS 3 heterostructure  c. without 

external electric field and  d. with a finite electric field of  -0.10 eV  Å-1. In panel  b and  d, the Ni  3d  states are shifted 

towards the WSe 2 conduction band, leading to hybridization and overlap of the states. I n the bilayer/monolayer system 

(panel  d), an additional splitting appears, coming from the different potential/field felt by the layers of WSe 2.

# a b

# c d35 

As already mentioned above, the addition of electric field (mimicking the experiment al conditions ),

leads to the crossing of multiple bands near the  point , thereby complicat ing a direct comparison of 

the MMEs for a single transition with experiment al results . As illustrated in Figure S 14, multiple WSe 2

intralayer transition s originating from the VB M as the initial state exhibit comparable MME strength 

(CB M+9 vs. CB M+11) . Consequen tly , akin to the experiment al scenario where all transitions contribute 

to the optical response , it is in principle necessary to consider all relevant transitions o ver a fine k -

point grid. 

Figure S 13. Different stacking configurations of monolayer NiPS 3 on bilayer WSe 2 (upper panel) and the corresponding 

change in the energy of the lowest WSe 2 intralayer transition at the K point (bottom panel), i.e., the change in the direct 

bandgap,  Egap . The bandgap is plotted with respect to the relative total energy of the correspo nding configuration, E rel .

The stacking geometries are sketched above the graph, where the length of the red and blue lines are kept constant, 

allowing for easier comparison of the interlayer distances between different stackings. The stacking nomenclature  is 

inspired by those of the TMD HSs: the upper two letters correspond to two high -symmetry positions in NiPS 3, and the 

lower two letters to high -symmetry positions in the interface WSe 2 layer, with “h” indicating the hollow site. The 

structural images are  arranged in the same order as in the graph below. 36 

Next , we compare d the DLP for the strongest WSe 2 intralayer transition in Figure S 15 without and with 

external electric field , mimic king the experimental conditions (see discussion in the main text). As the 

conduction bands of the two systems approach one an other, the DLP increases , and the texture in the 

2D map also changes , as shown in the top panels of Figures S 15. Similar effects can also be observed 

in the bilayer WSe 2/monolayer NiPS 3 heterostructure, as shown in Figure S 16.

Finally, the spin textures of the WSe 2 and NiPS 3 conduction bands are compared to examine how they 

change as the states approach each other . Figure S 17 display s the spin texture s for the different 

systems, showing the spin expectation values for the bands. The z-component 〈𝜎 𝑧 〉 is indicated by the 

color code of the arrows , in which green typically marks spin -degenerate bands. The arrow direc tion s

represent the in -plane spin components , with 〈𝜎 𝑥 〉 and 〈𝜎 𝑦 〉 align along the momentum (k) and energy 

direction s, respectively. Note that the se visualizations are qualitative , as the results are interpolated 

from a k-grid with increased density near the conduction -band minima at /S ( containing more than 

11,000 k points) , and an additional scaling factor is used to enhance visibility.          

> Figure S1 4.MMEs for circularly polarized light of the strongest WSe 2intralayer transition with the VB as initial state: a.
> to the CBM+9 b.to CBM+11. The transition to the CB+10 is shown in the main text. The transition VB to CB+12 has similar
> strength but the hot spots are further away from the point.

# a b37 

Along the X - line , all bands are spin -degenerate , as indicated by the green arrows ; therefore, the spin 

direction is arbitrary (and possible changes are meaningless) . However , along the -Y and S -

directions, the expectation values of 〈𝜎 𝑥 〉, 〈𝜎 𝑦 〉, and 〈𝜎 𝑧 〉 change upon applying external electric field s

of -0.25 eV Å -1 and -0. 10 eV Å -1 fo r the monolayer WSe 2/monolayer NiPS 3 and the bilayer 

WSe 2/monolayer NiPS 3 system, respectively. This can be seen by the altered color and direction of the 

arrows. Notably , a t and near the  point , modifications are especially pronounced in the Ni 3d bands 

(at lower energies) and in the conduction bands of WSe 2.

Figure  S1 5. Degree  of linear polarization (DLP) for the strongest WSe 2 intralayer transition ( shown in  Figure 7a  of the 

main t ext ):  a. without  external electric field,  and  b. wi th  an  external electric field , mimicking  the internal fields in the 

samples.  A d irect comparison reveals that as soon as the NiPS 3 bands approach the conduction band s of WSe 2, the  DLP 

increas e and becomes more asymmetric. In the 2D map of the MMEs, the shape of the red cones in the  -Y direction 

becomes sharper, and the small red area near   disappears. 

# a b38 

Figure  S1 6. One of the strongest WSe 2 intralayer transition in the bilayer WSe 2/monolayer NiPS 3 system. The MMEs for 

a. circularly polarized light, and  b. DLP. A clear asymmetry in the DLP is observed relative to the   point, along with a 

small but finite DLP at   itself. Since optical excitations do not occur at one specific k point, due to uncertainties such as 

the finite width of laser pulses or tempera ture -induced broadening, the transitions, and thus the corresponding excitons 

display a finite DLP in agreement with the experimental observations. 

# a b39 

Figure  S1 7. Spin texture of the monolayer/monolayer heterostructure in panels  a and  b, and the  bilayer WSe 2/monolayer 

NiPS 3 heterostructure in panels  c and  d, shown without (a, c) and with (b, d) an external electric . The  expectation value 

〈𝜎 𝑧 〉 is indicated by the color cod of the arrows , while t he  arrow  direction s indicate the in -plane components , with  〈𝜎 𝑥 〉

and  〈𝜎 𝑦 〉 corresponding  to  the  k and energy direction s, respectively.  Along the X - line , all bands are spin -degenerate ,

as indicated by the green arrows , and thus the direction of the spins is arbitrary. Yet, along  the  -Y and S - directions, 

th e expectation values of  〈𝜎 𝑥 〉, 〈𝜎 𝑦 〉, and  〈𝜎 𝑧 〉 change with the application of an external electric field, as can be seen by 

the changed color and direction of the arrows. Pronounced changes appear at and close the   point, particularly in the 

Ni  3d bands (at lower energies) and the WSe 2 conduction bands. 

> Bilayer WSe 2/Monolayer NiPS 3 Monolayer WSe 2/Monolayer NiPS 3

Without additional external field  With external field 

# a b

# c d40 

References 

(1) Fang, H.; Chuang, S.; Chang, T. C.; Takei, K.; Takahashi, T.; Javey, A. High -Performance Single 

Layered WSe 2 p -FETs with Chemically Doped Contacts. Nano Lett. 2012 , 12 , 3788 –3792. 

(2) Kuo, C. T.; Neumann, M.; Balamurugan, K.; Park, H. J.; Kang, S.; Shiu, H. W.; Kang, J. H.; Hong, 

B. H.; Han, M.; Noh, T. W.; Park, J. G. Exfoliation and Raman Spectroscopic Fingerprint of Few -

Layer NiPS 3 Van Der Waals Crystals. Sci. Rep. 2016 , 6, 1 –10. 

(3) del Corro, E.; Terrones, H.; Elias, A.; Fantini, C.; Feng, S.; Nguyen, M. A.; Mallouk, T. E.; 

Terrones, M.; Pimenta, M. A. Excited Excitonic States in 1L, 2L, 3L, and Bulk WSe 2 Observed 

by Resonant Raman Spectroscopy. ACS Nano 2014 , 8, 9629 –9635. 

(4) Blaga, C.; Labordet Álvarez, Á.; Balgarkashi, A.; Banerjee, M.; F ontcuberta i Morral, A.; 

Dimitrievska, M. Unveiling the Complex Phonon Nature and Phonon Cascades in 1L to 5L 

WSe2 Using Multiwavelength Excitation Raman Scattering. Nanoscale Adv. 2024 , 6, 4591 –

4603. 

(5) Ribeiro -Soares, J.; Janisch, C.; Liu, Z.; El í as, A. L.; Dresselhaus, M. S.; Terrones, M.; Cançado, L. 

G.; Jorio, A. Second Harmonic Generation in WSe2. 2D Mater. 2015 , 2, 045015. 

(6) Chu, H.; Roh, C. J.; Island, J. O.; Li, C.; Lee, S.; Chen, J.; Park, J. G.; Young, A. F.; Lee, J. S.; Hsieh, 

D. Linear Ma gnetoelectric Phase in Ultrathin MnPS3 Probed by Optical Second Harmonic 

Generation. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2020 , 124 , 27601. 

(7) Hao, M.; Zhang, J.; Zhang, X. H.; Chua, S. Photoluminescence Studies on InGaN/GaN Multiple 

Quantum Wells with Different Degree of L ocalization. Appl. Phys. Lett. 2002 , 81 , 5129 –5131. 

(8) Rudin, S., Reinecke, T. L. & Segall, B. Temperature -Dependent Exciton Linewidth in 

Semiconductors. Phys. Rev. B 1990 , 42 , 11218 –11231. 

(9) Varshni, Y. P. Temperature Dependence of the Energy Gap in Semiconductors. Physica 1967 ,

34 , 149 –154. 

(10) Kittel, C. Introduction to Solid State Physics , 8th ed.; Johanson Stuart, Ed.; John Wiley & Sons: 

Hoboken, NJ, 2005. 

(11) Norden, T.; Zhao, C.; Zhang, P.; Sabirianov, R.; Petrou, A.; Zeng, H. Giant Valley Splitting in 

Monolayer WS2 by Magnetic Proximity Effect. Nat. Commun. 2019 , 10 .

(12) Zhao, C.; Norden, T.; Zhang, P.; Zhao, P.; Cheng, Y.; Sun, F.; Parry, J. P.; Taheri, P. ; Wang, J.; 

Yang, Y.; Scrace, T.; Kang, K.; Yang, S.; Miao, G. X.; Sabirianov, R.; Kioseoglou, G.; Huang, W.; 

Petrou, A.; Zeng, H. Enhanced Valley Splitting in Monolayer WSe2 Due to Magnetic Exchange 

Field. Nat. Nanotechnol. 2017 , 12 , 757 –762. 

(13) Blum, V.; Gehrke, R.; Hanke, F.; Havu, P.; Havu, V.; Ren, X.; Reuter, K.; Scheffler, M. Ab Initio 

Molecular Simulations with Numeric Atom -Centered Orbitals. Comput. Phys. Commun. 2009 ,

180 , 2175 –2196. 

(14) Yu, V. W. zhe; Corsetti, F.; García, A.; Huhn, W. P.; J acquelin, M.; Jia, W.; Lange, B.; Lin, L.; Lu, 

J.; Mi, W.; Seifitokaldani, A.; Vázquez -Mayagoitia, Á.; Yang, C.; Yang, H.; Blum, V. ELSI: A 

Unified Software Interface for Kohn –Sham Electronic Structure Solvers. Comput. Phys. 

Commun. 2018 , 222 , 267 –285. 

(15 ) Havu, V.; Blum, V.; Havu, P.; Scheffler, M. Efficient O (N) Integration for All -Electron Electronic 

Structure Calculation Using Numeric Basis Functions. J. Comput. Phys. 2009 , 228 , 8367 –8379. 

(16) Perdew, J. P.; Burke, K.; Ernzerhof, M. Generalized Gra dient Approximation Made Simple. 41 

Phys. Rev. Lett. 1997 , 78 , 1396 –1396. 

(17) Tkatchenko, A.; Ambrosetti, A.; Distasio, R. A. Interatomic Methods for the Dispersion Energy 

Derived from the Adiabatic Connection Fluctuation -Dissipation Theorem. J. Chem. Phys. 2013 ,

138 .

(18) Hermann, J.; Tkatchenko, A. Density Functional Model for van Der Waals Interactions: 

Unifying Many -Body Atomic Approaches with Nonlocal Functionals. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2020 ,

124 , 146401. 

(19) Pack, J. D.; Monkhorst, H. J. Special Points fo r Brillouin -Zone Integrations. Phys. Rev. B 1977 ,

16 , 1748 –1749. 

(20) Sun, J.; Ruzsinszky, A.; Perdew, J. Strongly Constrained and Appropriately Normed Semilocal 

Density Functional. Phys. Rev. Lett. 2015 , 115 , 1 –6. 

(21) Huhn, W. P.; Blum, V. One -Hundred -Three Compound Band -Structure Benchmark of Post -

Self -Consistent Spin -Orbit Coupling Treatments in Density Functional Theory. Phys. Rev. 

Mater. 2017 , 1, 1 –18.