Title: Science Manuscript Template

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.12636v1

Published Time: Wed, 15 Apr 2026 01:02:28 GMT

Number of Pages: 21

Markdown Content:
Page 1 of 21 

Nonmonotonic Scaling of the Anomalous Hall Effect in a Bicollinear Antiferromagnet 

Ruifeng Wang 1, 4, Chi Fang 1, 4*, Ilya Kostanovski 1, Ke Xiao 1, Felix Küster 1, Jenny Davern 1, Naoto 

Nagaosa 2,3 , Stuart S. P. Parkin 1*  

> 1

Max Planck Institute of Microstructure Physics, Halle (Saale) 06120, Germany . 

> 2

RIKEN Center for Emergent Matter Science (CEMS), Wako, Saitama 351 -0198, Japan.  

> 3

Fundamental Quantum Science Program (FQSP), TRIP Headquarters, RIKEN, Wako 351 - 0198, 

Japan  

> 4

These authors contributed equally: Ruifeng Wang, Chi Fang 

> *

Email: chi.fang@mpi -halle.mpg.de, stuart.parkin@mpi -halle.mpg.de 

Abstract 

An anomalous Hall effect (AHE) in antiferromagnetic (AF) systems with no net 

magnetization is of considerable interest for both fundamental physics and spintronic 

applications. Of particular interest is the two -dimensional van der Waals antiferromagnet 

FeTe that has an unusual fully magnetically compensated bic ollinear AF structure and 

exhibits pronounced Kondo interaction leading to strong band renormalization . Here, we 

investigate the AHE in epitaxial FeTe thin films grown by molecular beam epitaxy. A large 

anomalous Hall conductivity is exhibited below the Né el temperature ( TN~60 K) and, 

strikingly, becomes nonlinear at high fields within a narrow temperature window around 49 

K, deviating from conventional AHE scaling behavior versus its longitudinal conductivity .

Linear fits reveal a pronounced negative peak in the intercept, accompanied by a field -

induced canted magnetic moment. The AHE responses are related to the Berry curvature 

derived from FeTe’s topological band structure, highlighting the intricate interplay between 

topology, magnetism, and electronic t ransport. Page 2 of 21 

Introduction 

The anomalous Hall effect (AHE) has long been recognized as a fundamental transport 

phenomenon that reveals the intimate connection between magnetism and electronic 

properties in solids. In general, the AHE can originate from the extrinsic mechanism due to 

scattering from impurities and defects, such as the skew scattering and side jump, or from 

the intrinsic mechan ism derived from the Berry curvature of the electronic bands (1). In 

ferromagnetic (FM) systems, both mechanisms usually coexist and, as a result, the intrinsic 

contribution to the AHE is often obscured and requires further distinction from extrinsic 

ones (2, 3). This has encouraged extensive investigations into the magnitude scaling laws 

between anomalous Hall conductivity ( AHC) σxy and longitudinal conductivity σxx in a

variety of ferromagnetic materials . Typically, σxy ∝ σxx for skew scattering and σxy ∝ constant 

for side jump or the intrinsic mechanism . Together, these yield a monoton ic conductivity 

dependence below the magnetic order ing temperature and are well explained by quantum 

transport theory (4). Meanwhile , AHE has also been reported in antiferromagnetic (AF) 

systems (5–11 ). The vanishing net magnetization suppresses extrinsic scattering channels, 

while broken symmetries may generate large Berry curvature, making it possible to realize 

an AHE that is dominantly intrinsic in o rigin. As a result, the AHE in AF systems fails to 

be reliably inferred from the magnetization. Instead, the developing scaling analysis could 

provide a framework for understanding the coexistence of AHE mechanism s in AF 

materials (12 –14 ).

From another perspective , deviation s from the conventional scaling relation probably 

indicates the involvement of additional mechanisms . An obvious breakdown of scaling law s

is reported in a ferromagnet ic USbTe with strong electron correlation (15 ). A Kondo lat tice ,

where the array of local moments interacts coherently with the conduction electrons via an 

antiferromagnetic interaction (16 ), can generate flat bands and thereby effectively modify 

the Berry curvature as the temperature varies . The extrinsic mechanism, in addition, is also 

in competition , making the analysis of scaling relation more complicated (15 ). Recently, 

Kondo lattice behavior is found in AF systems, e.g., Ce Te 3 (17 ), CeIn 3 (18 ), UOTe (19 ),

Mn 3+x Sn 1−x (20 ), and FeTe (21 ). But t he AHE and its scaling relations in these systems are 

not fully revealed yet. Among them, t etragonal FeTe represents a particularly intriguing 

case (21 , 22 ) with a high Kondo temperature (21 ). It is a metallic vdW material that becomes 

monoclinic belo w its Néel temperature, TN, and hosts a fully compensated bicollinear AF 

(BCAF) order (23 , 24 ). At the same time, FeTe possesses a topologically non -trivial band Page 3 of 21 

structure featuring nodal lines and nodal points near the Fermi energy (25 , 26 ), which could 

give rise to large Berry curvature. Nevertheless, the intrinsic AHE is always missing or 

ambiguous in the BCAF order, as the imperfections in the layers (27 , 28 ) or interstitial Fe 

atoms (29 ) may generate a net magnetization, leading to a ferromagnet -like AHE in low 

magnetic fields (<2 T) . The relationship between the BCAF order and the topological band 

structure governing the AHE intrinsically in FeTe has not yet been established. 

Here, we report the observation of an AHE, driven by the intrinsic Ber ry curvature, and its 

nonmonotonic scaling relation in epitaxial films of BCAF FeTe in the presence of a 

magnetic field. High -quality single -crystal FeTe thin films were prepared by molecular 

beam epitaxy on (001) SrTiO 3 single crystalline substrates. These films exhibit a Néel 

temperature ( TN) of ~60 K similar to that reported in bulk single crystals. They exhibit a 

BCAF order below TN (Fig. 1 , A and B) which arises from a competition between nearest, 

2nd and 3 rd neighbo r magnetic exchange interactions among Fe atoms that form a face -

centered square lattice within a single plane (30 , 31 ). These planes are separated from one 

another by planes of Te atoms which themselves are separated from each other by the vdW 

gap. Above TN, tetragonal FeTe exhibits a Hall conductivity (HC) that is proportional to the 

magnetic field with a positive slope. However, in a specific temperature range just below 

TN, the slope of the HC changes sign, accompanied by the emergence of a nonlinear AH C

at high fields. These results highlight a remarkable instance of significant AHE governed 

by intrinsic mechanisms in a collinear AF. 

Results 

Preparation of single -crystal bicollinear FeTe films 

High -quality FeTe films were prepared and precisely controlled using a state -of -the -art 

VEECO molecular beam epitaxy system (see Materials and Methods ). Under optimized 

growth parameters, FeTe films were epitaxially grown on SrTiO 3 (001) (STO) substrates i n

the Volmer -Weber (VW) mode, as evidenced by sharp reflection high -energy electron 

diffraction (RHEED) patterns and clear surface atomic force microscopic images (Fig. S1). 

The surface topography of FeTe films (Fig. S1 , B-E) reveals uniformly oriented tet ragonal 

islands coalesced into a continuous thin film that fully covers the STO substrate. Further 

analysis highlights well -defined terrace edges with a pronounced fourfold symmetry, 

indicative of the high single -crystal quality of the FeTe film in the tet ragonal structure. More Page 4 of 21 

importantly, the BCAF order exists in a narrow growth window (32 –35 ). Rutherford 

backscattering spectrometry (RBS) revealed the stoichiometry of our films to be Fe 1.08 Te 

(Fig. S2 ), consistent with results on bulk Fe 1+ xTe (32 , 33 ), which only forms and maintains 

BCAF ordering within the composition range 0.05< x< 0.12. Fig . 1C shows an atomically 

resolved scanning tunneling microscopy (STM) topography of the FeTe film. In contrast to 

cleaved bulk FeTe (34 , 35 ), our film exhibits a defect -free surface without excess Fe atoms. 

Using a spin -polarized tip, the STM image reveals a striped magnetic contrast with a spacing 

of 2 a (Fig. 1 D), consistent with the BCAF ordering observed in FeTe with low excess Fe 

content (34 , 35 ). The films’ ex ceptional crystallinity was further corroborated by x -ray 

diffraction (XRD) analysis (Fig. 1 E) and scanning transmission microscopy (STEM) 

imaging (Fig. 1F). The STEM cross -sectional image resolved atomic -scale structure at the 

FeTe/STO interface, while XR D patterns revealed a series of (00 n) Bragg peaks, satisfying 

the condition 2𝑑 sin 𝜃 = 𝑛𝜆 , where λ = 1.5406 Å is the x -ray wavelength. From these 

measurements, the lattice parameters of the FeTe film were determined to be 𝑎 = 𝑏 =

3.84 Å, 𝑐 = 6.26 Å, consistent with expectations for this material. Notably, the FeTe/STO 

interfacial structure, which exhibits a distinct SrO -Ti xO2-Ti xO2-Te -Fe -Te stacking sequence, 

as illustrated in the atomic model superimposed on Fig. 1 F. The observation of the double 

titanium oxide termination at the STO interface is noteworthy, as this feature has been 

extensively characterized in the analogous FeSe/STO interface (36 , 37 ), but there have been 

no reports to date in the FeTe/STO system. 

Anomalous Hall conductivity in FeTe 

Electrical measurements disclose the role played by the BCAF order in FeTe. Longitudinal 

resistivity ( ρxx ) measurements using a four -probe van der Pauw method (see Materials and 

Methods and Fig. S4, A -C) reveal a pronounced maximum at 60 K (Fig. 2 A), which is a 

clear signature of the phase transition from paramagnetic (PM) to AF order at TN. The 

magnetic orde r transition is accompanied by a structural phase transition from tetragonal to 

monoclinic which stabilizes the BCAF order (23 , 24 ). The peak in the ρxx - T curve is likely 

driven by enhanced spin fluctuations, as observed for other AF orderings (38 , 39 ). Above 

TN, ρxx exhibits a logarithmic temperature dependence, 𝜌 (𝑇 ) = 𝑎 + 𝑏 ∙ ln (𝑇 ) (fitting 

details are provided in Fig. S 5), consistent with the behavior previously reported in FeTe 

si ngle crystals with Kondo interactions (21 ). This logarithmic dependence reflects the 

interplay between localized spin fluctuations and itinerant carriers in the PM regime. Below Page 5 of 21 

TN, ρxx decreases with decreasing temperature, exhibiting metallic behavior indicative of 

suppressed scattering due to t he onset of the AF order and Kondo -lattice -like coherence 

(21 ). Intriguingly, a low -temperature upturn appears below 8 K, persisting to the lowest 

measurement temperature of 2 K. To elucidate this behavior, the ρxx (T) data below 30 K 

were fitted using a mo del incorporating multiple scattering mechanisms: ρ(T) =

a+b·T 2+c· ln( T)+d·T 5. Here, the 𝑇 2 term describes Fermi liquid behavior, while the 𝑇 5 term 

accounts for phonon -induced scattering, although its contribution is negligible compared to 

the other contributions. The ln (𝑇 ) term, indicative of Kondo -like behavior, suggests 

interactions between conduction electrons and excess Fe atoms, highlightin g the complex 

low -temperature electronic landscape of FeTe .

To explore th e AHE in FeTe, transverse resistivity ( ρxy ) measurements in an out -of -plane 

magnetic field ( B) up to 13.5 T were performed from 12 to 300 K ( Fig. 2 B). At low fields 

(< 2 T), ρxy (B) fo llows a linear dependence on B, resembling an OHE -like behavior in both 

the AF and PM states, consistent with the literature (27 , 29 ). However, at high magnetic 

fields, an unexpected Hall response , which is non -proportional to B, emerges, becoming 

particularly prominent in the intermediate temperature range (40 to 55 K). This Hall 

response is quantified by subtracting a linear background by fitting the high -field region ( B >

12.5 T) of the ρxy - B curves (Fig. 2 C). The intercept of these fitted curves defines the 

magnitude of the residual Hall resistivity ( 𝜌 𝑥𝑦  

> 𝑟

), which also serves as a measure of the 

curve’s nonlinearity. In general, 𝜌 𝑥𝑦  

> 𝑟

contains both any intrinsic as well as any extrinsic 

AHE, the latter of which is usually proportional to the net magnetization ( M). However, the 

similar nonlinear field dependence of the magnetization is absent, as discussed later, ruling 

out a dominant extrinsic contribution to 𝜌 𝑥𝑦  

> 𝑟

. As shown in Fig. 2 D and its inset, both 𝜌 𝑥𝑦  

> 𝑟

(T)

and the corresponding Hall conductivity, 𝜎 𝑥𝑦  

> 𝑟

(T) ≈ 𝜌 𝑥𝑦  

> 𝑟

(T)/ ρxx 2(T), exhibit a striking 

negative peak within a narrow temperature window around 49 K, noted as Tp, while 

remaining nearly zero at temperatures away from it. 𝜎 𝑥𝑦  

> 𝑟

increases by almost 10 times from 

12 K to 49 K and then rapidly shrinks to nearly zero beyond TN. To further elucidate the 

origin of this peak , we inspect the scaling relation of 𝜌 𝑥𝑦  

> 𝑟

vs . ρ xx and absolute value | 𝜎 𝑥𝑦  

> 𝑟

| vs .

σxx =1 / ρxx , respectively. As shown in Fig. 2E, 𝜌 𝑥𝑦  

> 𝑟

is negligible and shows no clear 

correlation with ρxx above TN. Below TN, 𝜌 𝑥𝑦  

> 𝑟

maintains an obvious nonmonotonic scaling 

relation with ρxx , reaching a pronounced minimum near ρxx = 400 μΩ·cm, which corresponds 

to Tp. We use a logarithmic scale to present the scaling of the |𝜎 𝑥𝑦  

> 𝑟

| vs. σxx for T ≤ TN in Fig. Page 6 of 21 

2F . The correlation gradually turned from positive to negative over Tp. Although the positive 

section might relate to the scattering process, the negative section lacks of an intuitive origin. 

Such deviation from the conventional scaling law behavior suggests that the underlying 

AHE mechanism is not dominated by ordinary mechanisms alone. 

Several possible mechanisms could be accountable . W e first rule out the non -AHE ones . A

nonlinear field dependence of the OHE has often been reported in high mobility ( μi, i = e

for electrons or h for holes) systems (40 , 41 ). Such behavior arises from the coexistence of 

electrons and holes, where the effective Hall conductivity is tuned by their relative 

concentrations and mobilities within a multi -band framework. To consider this, we extracted 

the slopes at low field, 𝑅 𝐻 

> Low

, and high field, 𝑅 𝐻 

> 𝐻𝑖𝑔 ℎ

, as shown in Figs. 3 A and B. Pronounced 

nonlinearities in the field dependence are expected to emerge only when the cyclotron 

motion of the carriers becomes sufficiently stro ng. Conversely, when ωcτ ≪ 1, the OHE 

coefficient is constant and gives only a linear field dependence of 𝜌 𝑥𝑦 , where ωc is the 

cyclotron frequency and τ is the relaxation time (42 , 43 ). We find that the carrier mobility μ

in our films, estimated from 𝑅 𝐻  

> 𝐻𝑖𝑔 ℎ

(Fig. S4D ), is very low (comparable to values found in 

previous work (28 )). The magnitude of μ satisfies the low field criterion, ωcτ = μB ~ 10 -3 ≪

1. Therefore, a nonlinear OHE response is not expected in our films. Additional insight is 

provi ded by the longitudinal thermoelectric response, i.e., the Seebeck effect which 

indirectly reflects the carrier types and mobilities. We performed thermoelectric voltage 

(Vth ) measurements using the setup shown in Fig. 3 C, and compared the results with the 

nominal Hall coefficient. The drift of carriers under a temperature gradient generates a 

voltage Vth , whose sign and magnitude reflect the dominant carrier type and its relative 

density. As displayed in Fig. 3 D, the measured Vth exhibits two distinct sign reversals, 

signaling carrier -type transitions. The first reversal, from positive to negative around 45 K, 

marks a switch from electron to hole dominance. This behavior is consistent with the sign 

change in the 𝑅 𝐻  

> 𝐻𝑖𝑔 ℎ

(Fig. 3 B). Taken together, both t he low mobility and the thermoelectric 

data indicate that the nonlinearities in 𝜌 𝑥𝑦  

> 𝑟

of FeTe cannot be explained by multiband OHE 

and point towards the AHE mechanism underlying the observed nonlinear Hall response. 

Tiny magnetic moment in FeTe under an external field 

The magnitude of AHE can be tuned by the magnetization, which affect s the spin 

polarization, especially the out -of -plane component in our case . Next, we examine the role 

played by the magnetic -field -induced magnetization. We measure d the field dependence of Page 7 of 21 

M in our films using a magnetometer (see Materials and Methods ). The M(B) curves, shown 

in Fig. 4 A for out -of -plane field ( B// c) and in Fig. S 6 for in -plane field (B// a), are dominated 

by the diamagnetic signal from the STO substr ate ( Fig. S 7). The extracted nonlinear 

contribution (shown in Fig. 4 B) reveals a very small M with no obvious temperature 

dependence. The field dependence in Fig. 4 B is clearly different from that of 𝜌 𝑥𝑦 (Fig. 2 C). 

The saturation magnetization ( MS) extracted from the high -field regions remains very small 

across the entire temperature range (Fig. 4 C middle panel). The contribution from the STO 

substrate ( Fig. 4 C bottom panel ) was measured on a bare substrate and subtracted from the 

total signal. The isolated contribution from the FeTe film (Fig. 4 C top panel) shows only a 

very small magnetic moment without any significant temperature dependence unlike that of 

𝜌 𝑥𝑦  

> 𝑟

(T) in Fig 2 D. Specifically, 𝜌 𝑥𝑦  

> 𝑟

in our case emerges near 49 K, rather than at lower 

temperatures, and shows no correlation with the measured M. Nevertheless, the M (B) loops 

do indicate the possibility of small canted magnetic moments with a very small tilt angle 

about 0.26˚, which brea ks time reversal symmetry and could generate an intrinsic AHE. W e

further carried out polar reflective magnetic circular dichroism (RMCD) measurements to 

probe the field dependence of the MFeTe along the out -of -plane direction (Fig. 4 D). The 

RMCD signal ar ises from within the limited skin depth and therefore is more sensitive to 

the FeTe moment. The signal varies only linearly with field with a positive slope at each 

temperature. A clear peak in this slope is observed near TN that is characteristic of an AF 

order. While a simple extrinsic AHE from spin canting along hard -axis would give rise to a 

linear field -dependent contribution to ρxy , the nonlinear field -dependent contribution 𝜌 𝑥𝑦 

> 𝑟

can arise intrinsically from the evolution of the electronic struct ure in magnetic field. For 

the AF FeTe system, in the absence of an external field, the Berry curvature vanishes due 

to the time -reversal symmetry above TN and the combined symmetry of time -reversal and 

spatial inversion below TN, which enforces a two -fold Kramers ’ degeneracy across all bands. 

However, applying a magnetic field induces a net M due to spin canting and breaks such a 

symmetry, lifting band dege neracies and opening a gap at certain symmetry -protected band 

crossings, depending on the details of the band structure and symmetry protection. This 

induces a Berry curvature redistribution in momentum space and generates a nonzero Berry 

curvature integra l below the Fermi surface. 

Mechanism analysis Page 8 of 21 

The 𝜌 𝑥𝑦  

> 𝑟

is likely of an intrinsic origin with an unusual temperature dependence and scaling 

relation . The AHE appears as the BCAF builds up and the negative maximum of 𝜌 𝑥𝑦  

> 𝑟

takes 

place at Tp just below TN. The PM to BCAF phase change should be responsible. However, 

a spin fluctuation mechanism , which could result in nonmonotonic T dependence, cannot 

explain the scaling of 𝜌 𝑥𝑦  

> 𝑟

in our case as it would rather give rise to a maximum in the AHC 

at TN. The carrier type change is also not a good candidate as its crossover temperature is 

around 45 K, a little smaller than the Tp. Alternatively, we come to the Kondo physics aspect. 

We show the temperatu re dependence of the first derivative of ρxx with respect to T, i.e. ,

dρxx / dT, in Fig . 5A , which is thought to be sensitive to phase changes. Simultaneously, as 

the BCAF order emerges as temperature decreases, the spin fluctuation is fading and 

coherent Kondo scattering is forming to create a Kondo lattice, which leads to the decrease 

of the ρxx (16 ). The local hybridization between localized Fe 3d xy and itinerant Te 5p z

orbitals is thought to reconstruct the band structure below TN (21 ). A peak at 48.3 K 

indicates the dramatic evolution of the band structure, which is, surprisingly, almost the 

same as Tp. We show that the 𝜌 𝑥𝑦  

> 𝑟

exhibits a strong positive correlation with dρxx / dT (Fig. 

5B) . Temperature alone , via the broadening of the Fermi –Dirac distribution , is unlikely to 

produce such a large effect of AHE. I nstead, it more likely drives a reconstruction of the 

electronic bands by renormalizing the strength of exchange interactions. Specifically, t he

coherent Kondo interaction drive s band renormalization which enhance s Berry curvature 

near the Tp, leading to a strongly temperature -dependent net Berry -curvature contribution 

to the AHE. 

Discussion 

Compared to other col linear AF systems, the observed magnitude of the AH E is high in 

FeTe (5). However, the magnitude is at least one order of magnitude smaller than those due 

to an intrinsic mechanism in non -collinear AF materials (5) or in some FM s (1). Th is could 

arise from several factors. While FeTe also has domains with different directions of the 

BCAF ordering, al l domains have , in a nonzero magnetic field, a small net magnetic 

moment induced along the field direction from spin canting . Thus, contributions from 

different domains do not cancel each other and the AHC remains robust against variation s

in the AF domain distribution. However, since the present measurements are performed 

with the current confined to the (001) plane, we cannot rule out the possibility that FeTe 

exhibits different AHE responses with current along other directions, especially for current 

applied perpendicular to the vdW gap. Similar to the case of non -collinear AF ones (7, 8),Page 9 of 21 

a single magnetic domain in FeTe may host a spontaneous nonzero AHE when the current 

is applied along the [001 ] direction. Meanwhile, spin disorder at magnetic and structural 

domain walls (44 ) can alter the total AHC. The relationship between the AHE and the 

magnetic domain structures in FeTe remains to be further investigated, as the domain 

configuration is , in p ractice , difficult to control. Also, although fluctuation effects cannot 

account for the AHE origin in FeTe, they could modify the AHC magnitude (8, 45 ).

Overall, the combination of magnetization, Hall, and thermoelectric measurements provides 

a coherent picture: The Hall response in FeTe/STO films is primarily governed by the 

intrinsic topology of the band structure. The absence of significant magnetic moments, the 

temperature evolution of the AHC, and the Berry curvature distribution all point to a 

topol ogical origin of the AHE, providing crucial insights into the interplay between 

magnetism and electronic band topology in correlated systems. Our findings establish FeTe 

as a compelling platform for probing intrinsic topological phenomena in antiferromagne ts. 

By elucidating the interplay between magnetism, topology, and electronic transport, this 

work not only deepens our understanding of the Hall effect in collinear AF systems but also 

open s avenues for future exploration of Berry curvature -driven phenomen a, with significant 

potential applications in spintronic technologies. 

Materials and Methods 

Growth of FeTe/SrTiO 3 films 

FeTe films in this work were grown on SrTiO 3(STO) (100) substrates using a Veeco GEN10 

MBE system under ultrahigh vacuum (UHV) conditions better than 2×10 -10 Torr to 

minimize impurities. Prior to growth, the STO substrates underwent chemical treatment and 

high -temperature annealing to achieve an atomically smooth, TiO₂ -terminated surf ace. The 

cleaning process involved ultrasonic treatment in acetone and isopropanol to remove 

adsorbed impurities, followed by immersion in a 90°C hot water bath for 20 min to convert 

surface SrO into hydroxide complexes. These complexes were then dissolved in a 9 wt% 

HCl solution for 20 min. After thorough rinsing with deionized water, the substrates were 

annealed at 1000°C for 3 hours in a tube furnace under an oxygen atmosphere , resulting in 

well -defined TiO₂ step -terrace structures. Once transferred to t he UHV chamber, they were 

further degassed at 600°C for 2 hours before film deposition. Page 10 of 21 

FeTe films were synthesized by co -depositing Fe (99.99% purity) via a high -temperature 

Knudsen cell and Te (99.999% purity) via a valved cracker cell, with the substrat e

temperature maintained at 350°C. Beam flux was characterized using a beam flux monitor, 

ensuring a Te:Fe flux ratio of approximately 9.5:1 and a growth rate of 1 ML/min. Real -

time RHEED monitoring (kSA 400) was employed to track surface evolution. After 

deposition, the films were annealed at the growth temperature for 20 min to remove excess 

Te and enhance crystallinity. Finally, a ~1 nm Al capping layer was deposited in situ after 

the sample cooled to room temperature. Upon air exposure, this layer natur ally oxidized 

into a dense AlO x barrier, effectively preventing FeTe oxidation. 

X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS) further indicated the binding energies of Fe and 

Te remained in their Fe 0 and Te 0 states with the protective Al 2O3 capping layer ( Fig. S 3), 

ruling out surface oxidation or degradation into other impurity compounds (46 ). Unless 

otherwise specified, all data presented in this work were obtained from FeTe films with a 

uniform thickness of 25 monolayers (MLs). 

Structural and magnetism characte rization 

The structure and quality of the FeTe/STO films were characterized using X -ray diffraction 

(XRD), atomic force microscopy (AFM), scanning transmission electron microscopy 

(STEM), and scanning tunneling microscopy (STM). XRD measurements were perfo rmed 

on a high -resolution diffractometer (Bruker D8) equipped with monochromatic Cu Kα₁ 

radiation (λ = 1.5406 Å), operating at 40 kV and 40 mA. Surface topography was examined 

by AFM (Bruker Dimension Icon) under ambient conditions. Measurements were 

condu cted in tapping mode with a scan rate of 1 Hz. The acquired images were processed 

with NanoScope Analysis software using standard flattening procedures. High -angle 

annular dark -field (HAADF) STEM images were acquired on a spherical -aberration -

corrected tra nsmission electron microscope. Atomically resolved surface structure and 

magnetic ordering were investigated using an UHV STM apparatus (Unisoku USM1600) at 

5 K. The FeTe sample for STM measurements was grown on a 0.5 wt% Nb -doped STO 

substrate using the s ame recipe as for the transport samples in the Veeco chamber. To 

prevent surface degradation during the rapid ex situ transfer, a 30 -nm -thick Te capping layer 

was deposited at room temperature and subsequently removed by annealing at 350℃ for 30 

min in the STM chamber. Topographic images were acquired with a Cr bulk tip, and 

magnetic contrast was obtained using a spin -polarized tip prepared by gently indenting the Page 11 of 21 

tip into the surface to attach a Fe cluster (47 ). The STM images were analyzed by fast 

Fourier transform (FFT) using WSxM software. The magnetic moment was determined 

using a QD MPMS3 as the mentioned magnetometer . RMCD was measured with QD 

OptiCool. 

Transport measurements 

Electronical transport measure ments were conducted using a Physical Property 

Measurement System (QD DynaCool 1.9 K, 14 T) via the van der Pauw (vdP) method unless 

otherwise specified. Four electrodes were manually bonded at the corners of a square 

sample, as illustrated in Fig. S4A , us ing a wire bonder (West bond). For longitudinal 

resistivity ( 𝜌 𝑥𝑥 ) measurements, a direct current ( 𝐼 12 = 20 μA) was applied from electrode 1 

to electrode 2 using a Keithley 6221 current source, and the voltage ( 𝑈 43 , defined as U4 –

U3) was measured betwe en electrodes 3 and 4 using a Keithley 2182A voltmeter. The 𝜌 𝑥𝑥 

was then calculated by averaging the resistances in two orthogonal directions, according to 

the formula: 𝜌 𝑥𝑥 = 𝜋  

> 𝑙𝑛 2

∙ 𝑈 43 𝐼 12 ⁄ +𝑈 23 𝐼 14 ⁄ 

> 2

∙ 𝑡 , where 𝜋  

> 𝑙𝑛 2

is the vdP constant and t is the film 

thickness. The corresponding longitudinal conductivity was determined by 𝜎 𝑥𝑥 = 1 𝜌 𝑥𝑥 ⁄ .

For Hall effect measurements, a direct current ( 𝐼 13 = 100 𝜇𝐴 ) was applied along one 

diagonal direction of the sample while the voltage ( 𝑈 42 ) was measured along the orthogonal 

diagonal. The transverse resistivity ( 𝜌 𝑥𝑦 ) was calculated using: 𝜌 𝑥𝑦 = 𝑈 42 𝐼 13 ⁄ ∙ 𝑡 . To 

correct for any asymmetry in electrode placement, the 𝜌 𝑥𝑦 at each magnetic field strength 

was antisymmetrized usi ng: 𝜌 𝑥𝑦 (𝐵 ) = 𝜌 𝑥𝑦 (𝐵 )−𝜌 𝑥𝑦 (−𝐵 ) 

> 2

. Subsequently, the Hall conductivity 

was determined by 𝜎 𝑥𝑦 (𝐵 , 𝑇 ) = 𝜌 𝑥𝑦 (𝐵 ,𝑇 ) 

> 𝜌 𝑥𝑥 (0,𝑇 )2

, using the zero -field value of 𝜌 𝑥𝑥 , which was 

found to be negligibly dependent on magnetic field compared to 𝜌 𝑥𝑦 (Fig. S4, B and C). All 

the temperature -dependent measurements are conducted as warming up. Page 12 of 21 

References 

1. N. Nagaosa, J. Sinova, S. Onoda, A. H. MacDonald, N. P. Ong, Anomalous Hall effect. Rev. 

Mod. Phys. 82 , 1539 –1592 (2010). 

2. S. Onoda, Intrinsic versus extrinsic anomalous Hall effect in ferromagnets . Phys. Rev. Lett. 

97 (2006). 

3. Y. Tian, L. Ye, X. Jin, Proper scaling of the anomalous Hall effect . Phys. Rev. Lett. 103 ,

087206 (2009). 

4. S. Onoda, Quantum transport theory of anomalous electric, thermoelectric, and thermal Hall 

effects in ferromagnets. Phys. Rev. B 77 (2008). 

5. L. Šmejkal, A. H. MacDonald, J. Sinova, S. Nakatsuji, T. Jungwirth, Anomalous Hall 

antiferromagnets. Nat . Rev . Mater . 7, 482 –496 (2022). 

6. R. Shindou, N. Nagaosa, Orbital ferromagnetism and anomalous Hall effect in 

antiferromagnets on the distorted fcc lattice . Phys. Rev. Lett. 87 , 116801 (2001). 

7. V. Baltz, A. Manchon, M. Tsoi, T. Moriyama, T. Ono, Y. Tserkovny ak, Antiferromagnetic 

spintronics. Rev. Mod. Phys. 90 , 015005 (2018). 

8. A. K. Nayak, J. E. Fischer, Y. Sun, B. Yan, J. Karel, A. C. Komarek, C. Shekhar, N. Kumar, 

W. Schnelle, J. Kübler, C. Felser, S. S. P. Parkin, Large anomalous Hall effect driven by a 

nonvanishing Berry curvature in the noncolinear antiferromagnet Mn 3Ge. Sci. Adv. 2,

e1501870 (2016). 

9. S. Nakatsuji, N. Kiyohara, T. Higo, Large anomalous Hall effect in a non -collinear 

antiferromagnet at room temperature. Nature 527 , 212 –215 (2015). 

10. X. Li, J. Koo, Z. Zhu, K. Behnia, B. Yan, Field -linear anomalous Hall effect and Berry 

curvature induced by spin chirality in the kagome antiferromagnet Mn 3Sn. Nat . Commun .

14 , 1642 (2023). 

11. D. Zhu, J. Lu, Y. Jiang, Z. Zheng, D. Wang, C. Z hou, J. Zhou, S. Chen, Y. Gu, L. Liu, P. 

Yang, K. Shi, S. Peng, G. Xing, W. Zhao, J. Chen, Observation of anomalous Hall effect in 

collinear antiferromagnet IrMn. Nano Lett. 25 , 4307 –4313 (2025). 

12. S. Xu, B. Dai, Y. Jiang, D. Xiong, H. Cheng, L. Tai, M. Tang, Y. Sun, Y. He, B. Yang, Y. 

Peng, K. L. Wang, W. Zhao, Universal scaling law for chiral antiferromagnetism. Nat .

Commun . 15 , 3717 (2024). 

13. H. Jeon, H. Seo, J. Seo, Y. H. Kim, E. S. Choi, Y. Jo, H. N. Lee, J. M. Ok, J. S. Kim, Large 

anomalous Hall conductivity induced by spin chirality fluctuation in an ultraclean frustrated 

antiferromagnet PdCrO 2. Commun . Phys . 7, 162 (2024). Page 13 of 21 

14. L. Song, F. Zhou, H. Li, B. Ding, X. Li, X. Xi, Y. Yao, Y. -C. Lau, W. Wang, Large 

anomalous Hall effect at room temper ature in a Fermi -level -tuned Kagome antiferromagnet .

Adv. Funct. Mater. 34 , 2316588 (2024). 

15. H. Siddiquee, C. Broyles, E. Kotta, S. Liu, S. Peng, T. Kong, B. Kang, Q. Zhu, Y. Lee, L. 

Ke, H. Weng, J. D. Denlinger, L. A. Wray, S. Ran, Breakdown of the sc aling relation of 

anomalous Hall effect in Kondo lattice ferromagnet USbTe. Nat . Commun . 14 , 527 (2023). 

16. P. Coleman, Introduction to Many -Body Physics (Cambridge University Press, 2015). 

17. H. Zeng, Y. Zhang, B. Ji, J. Cai, S. Zou, Z. Wang, C. Dong, K. Luo, Y. Yuan, K. Wang, J. 

Zhang, C. Xi, J. Wang, L. Li, Y. Dai, J. Li, Y. Luo, Kondo -coupled van der Waals 

antiferromagnet with high -mobility quasiparticles. Newton 2, 100320 (2026). 

18. W. Si meth, Z. Wang, E. A. Ghioldi, D. M. Fobes, A. Podlesnyak, N. H. Sung, E. D. Bauer, 

J. Lass, S. Flury, J. Vonka, D. G. Mazzone, C. Niedermayer, Y. Nomura, R. Arita, C. D. 

Batista, F. Ronning, M. Janoschek, A microscopic Kondo lattice model for the heavy 

fer mion antiferromagnet CeIn 3. Nat . Commun . 14 , 8239 (2023). 

19. C. Broyles, S. Mardanya, M. Liu, J. Ahn, T. Dinh, G. Alqasseri, J. Garner, Z. Rehfuss, K. 

Guo, J. Zhu, D. Martinez, D. Li, Y. Hao, H. Cao, M. Boswell, W. Xie, J. G. Philbrick, T. 

Kong, L. Yang, A. Vishwanath, P. Kim, S. -Y. Xu, J. E. Hoffman, J. D. Denlinger, S. 

Chowdhury, S. Ran, UOTe: Kondo -interacting topological antiferromagnet in a van der 

waals lattice . Adv. Mater. 37 , 2414966 (2025). 

20. D. Khadka, T. R. Thapaliya, S. Hurtado Parra, X. Ha n, J. Wen, R. F. Need, P. Khanal, W. 

Wang, J. Zang, J. M. Kikkawa, L. Wu, S. X. Huang, Kondo physics in antiferromagnetic 

Weyl semimetal Mn 3+x Sn 1−x films. Sci. Adv. 6, eabc1977 (2020). 

21. Y. Kim, M. -S. Kim, D. Kim, M. Kim, M. Kim, C. -M. Cheng, J. Choi, S . Jung, D. Lu, J. H. 

Kim, S. Cho, D. Song, D. Oh, L. Yu, Y. J. Choi, H. -D. Kim, J. H. Han, Y. Jo, J. H. Shim, J. 

Seo, S. Huh, C. Kim, Kondo interaction in FeTe and its potential role in the magnetic order. 

Nat. Commun. 14 , 4145 (2023). 

22. L. Kang, C. Ye, X. Zhao, X. Zhou, J. Hu, Q. Li, D. Liu, C. M. Das, J. Yang, D. Hu, J. Chen, 

X. Cao, Y. Zhang, M. Xu, J. Di, D. Tian, P. Song, G. Kutty, Q. Zeng, Q. Fu, Y. Deng, J. 

Zhou, A. Ariando, F. Miao, G. Hong, Y. Huang, S. J. Pennycook, K. -T. Yong, W. Ji, X. 

Rensha w Wang, Z. Liu, Phase -controllable growth of ultrathin 2D magnetic FeTe crystals. 

Nat . Commun . 11 , 3729 (2020). 

23. E. E. Rodriguez, C. Stock, P. Zajdel, K. L. Krycka, C. F. Majkrzak, P. Zavalij, M. A. Green, 

Magnetic -crystallographic phase diagram of the superconducting parent compound Fe 1+x Te. 

Phys. Rev. B 84 , 064403 (2011). Page 14 of 21 

24. W. Bao, Tunable ( 𝛿𝜋 , 𝛿𝜋 )-type antiferromagnetic order in 𝛼 -Fe(Te,Se) superconductors .

Phys. Rev. Lett. 102 (2009). 

25. M. G. Vergniory, L. Elcoro, C. Felser, N. Regnault, B. A. Bernevig, Z. Wang, A complete 

catalogue of high -quality topological materials. Nature 566 , 480 –485 (2019). 

26. Topological Materials Database, https://topologicalquantumchemistry.org. 

27. I. Tsukada, M. Hanawa , S. Komiya, A. Ichinose, T. Akiike, Y. Imai, A. Maeda, Mobility 

analysis of FeTe thin films . J. Phys. Soc. Jpn. 80 , 023712 (2011). 

28. I. Tsukada, M. Hanawa, S. Komiya, A. Ichinose, T. Akiike, Y. Imai, A. Maeda, Hall effect 

of FeTe and Fe(Se 1–xTe x) thin films . Physica C: Superconductivity and its Applications 471 ,

625 –629 (2011). 

29. M. Meng, S. Liu, D. Song, X. Zhang, H. Du, H. Huang, H. Liu, Z. Sun, C. Mei, H. Yang, 

H. Tian, Y. Lu, Y. Zhang, J. Li, Y. Zhao, Magnetotransport property of oxygen -annealed 

Fe 1+y Te thin films . J. Phys.: Condens. Matter 35 , 305701 (2023). 

30. F. Ma, W. Ji, J. Hu, Z. -Y. Lu, T. Xiang, First -principles calculations of the electronic 

structure of tetragonal α-FeTe and α-FeSe Crystals: Evidence for a bicollinear 

antiferromagnetic order . Phys. Rev. Lett. 102 , 177003 (2009). 

31. M. J. Han, S. Y. Savrasov, Doping driven (π, 0) nesting and magnetic properties of Fe 1+x Te 

superconductors.  Phys. Rev. Lett. 103 , 067001 (2009). 

32. S. Rößler, D. Cherian, W. Lorenz, M. Doerr, C. Koz , C. Curfs, Yu.  Prots, U. K. Rößler, U. 

Schwarz, S. Elizabeth, S. Wirth, First -order structural transition in the magnetically ordered 

phase of Fe 1.13 Te. Phys. Rev. B 84 , 174506 (2011). 

33. C. Koz, S. Rößler, A. A. Tsirlin, S. Wirth, U. Schwarz, Low -tempe rature phase diagram of 

Fe 1+y Te studied using x -ray diffraction. Phys. Rev. B 88 , 094509 (2013). 

34. M. Enayat, Z. Sun, U. R. Singh, R. Aluru, S. Schmaus, A. Yaresko, Y. Liu, C. Lin, V. 

Tsurkan, A. Loidl, J. Deisenhofer, P. Wahl, Real -space imaging of the atomic -scale 

magnetic structure of Fe 1+y Te. Science 345 , 653 –656 (2014). 

35. C. Trainer, C. M. Yim, C. Heil, F. Giustino, D. Croitori, V. Tsurkan, A. Loidl, E. E. 

Rodriguez, C. Stock, P. Wahl, Manipulating surface magnetic order in iron telluride. Sci .

Adv. 5, eaav3478 (2019). 

36. F. Li, Q. Zhang, C. Tang, C. Liu, J. Shi, C. Nie, G. Zhou, Z. Li, W. Zhang, C. -L. Song, K. 

He, S. Ji, S. Zhang, L. Gu, L. Wang, X. -C. Ma, Q. -K. Xue, Atomically resolved 

FeSe/SrTiO 3(001) interface structure by scanning transm ission electron microscopy. 2D 

Mater. 3, 024002 (2016). Page 15 of 21 

37. H. Sims, D. N. Leonard, A. Y. Birenbaum, Z. Ge, T. Berlijn, L. Li, V. R. Cooper, M. F. 

Chisholm, S. T. Pantelides, Intrinsic interfacial van der Waals monolayers and their effect 

on the high -temp erature superconductor FeSe/SrTiO 3. Phys. Rev. B 100 , 144103 (2019). 

38. P. E. Brommer, N. H. Duc, “Magnetoelasticity in Nanoscale Heterogeneous Materials” in 

Encyclopedia of Materials: Science and Technology , K. H. J. Buschow, R. W. Cahn, M. C. 

Flemings, B. Ilschner, E. J. Kramer, S. Mahajan, P. Veyssière, Eds. (Elsevier, Oxford, 2004) .

39. C. Fang, C. Wan, X. Zhang, S. Okamoto, T. Ma, J. Qin, X. Wang, C. Guo, J. Dong, G. Yu, 

Z. Wen, N. Tang, S. S. P. Parkin, N. Nagaosa, Y. Lu, X. Han, Observation of the fluctuation 

spin Hall effect in a low -resistivity antiferromagnet. Nano Lett. 23 , 11485 –11492 (2023). 

40. K. Wang, C. Petrovic, Multiband effects and possible Dirac states in LaAgSb 2. Phys. Rev. 

B 86 , 155213 (2012). 

41. J. E. Dill, C. F. C. Chang, D. Je na, H. G. Xing, Two -carrier model -fitting of Hall effect in 

semiconductors with dual -band occupation: A case study in GaN two -dimensional hole gas. 

J. Appl. Phys. 137 , 025702 (2025). 

42. C. M. Hurd, The Hall Effect in Metals and Alloys , Ch. 2 (Springer US, Boston, MA, 1972). 

43. J. Sólyom, Fundamentals of the Physics of Solids , Ch. 24 (Springer, 2011) .

44. O. J. Amin, A. Dal Din, E. Golias, Y. Niu, A. Zakharov, S. C. Fromage, C. J. B. Fields, S. 

L. Heywood, R. B. Cousins, F. Maccherozzi , J. Krempaský, J. H. Dil, D. Kriegner, B. Kiraly, 

R. P. Campion, A. W. Rushforth, K. W. Edmonds, S. S. Dhesi, L. Šmejkal, T. Jungwirth, P. 

Wadley, Nanoscale imaging and control of altermagnetism in MnTe. Nature 636 , 348 –353 

(2024). 

45. Z. Fang, N. Nagaos a, K. S. Takahashi, A. Asamitsu, R. Mathieu, T. Ogasawara, H. Yamada, 

M. Kawasaki, Y. Tokura, K. Terakura, The anomalous Hall effect and magnetic monopoles 

in momentum space . Science 302 , 92 –95 (2003). 

46. D. Telesca, Y. Nie, J. I. Budnick, B. O. Wells, B . Sinkovic, Surface valence states and 

stoichiometry of non -superconducting and superconducting FeTe films. Surf. Sci. 606 ,

1056 –1061 (2012). 

47. U. R. Singh, Preparation of magnetic tips for spin -polarized scanning tunneling microscopy 

on Fe 1+y Te. Phys. Rev. B 91 (2015). 

48 . J. Moon, Q. Zou, H. Zhang, O. M. J. van ‘t Erve, N. G. Combs, L. Li, C. H. Li, Magnetic 

field -induced spin nematic phase up to room temperature in epitaxial antiferromagnetic 

FeTe thin films grown by molecular beam epitaxy. ACS Nano 17 , 16886 –16894 (2023). Page 16 of 21 

49 . D. Telesca, Y. Nie, J. I. Budnick, B. O. Wells, B. Sinkovic, Surface valence states and 

stoichiometry of non -superconducting and superconducting FeTe films. Surf. Sci. 606 ,

1056 –1061 (2012). 

50 . D. Telesca, Y. Nie, J. I. Budnick, B. O. Wells, B. Sinkovic, Impact of valence states on the 

superconductivity of iron telluride and iron selenide films with incorporated oxygen. Phys. 

Rev. B 85 , 214517 (2012). 

51. S. Okamoto, A. Moreo, N. Nagaosa, S. S. P. Parkin, Berry curvature and intrinsic anomalous 

Hall effect in an antiferromagnet FeTe under magnetic field. private communication. Page 17 of 21 

Figures and Tables 

Fig. 1 . Structural characterizations of the FeTe/STO film. (A) Schematic lattice structure 

of FeTe. (B) Schematic diagram of the bicollinear antiferromagnetic order in the 

ground state on the a-b plane of FeTe. The Fe spins are marked by red and blue 

arrows. (C) Atomically resolved STM topography of a FeTe film ( V = -100 mV, I =

100 pA). Inset: FFT patterns of the topographic image. (D) STM topography 

acquired with a spin -polarized tip ( V = -100 mV, I = 200 pA). Both the stripes of 2 a

spacing and the peaks qAF = 1/2 qTe in the FFT patterns (inset) indicate the 

bicolli near AF order in b. The blue and red stripes indicate the configuration of 

bicollinear AF order. (E) XRD patterns of the FeTe/STO film with evident ( 00n )

brag peaks for both of FeTe and STO. (F) Cross sectional HAADF -STEM image 

near the interface between FeTe and STO, viewed along [010] direction. To clarify 

the interface structure, the color -coded atomic models are partially superimposed on 

the STEM data. Page 18 of 21 

Fig. 2. Transport properties and ano malous Hall effect in FeTe/STO . (A) Longitudinal 

resistivity ( 𝜌 𝑥𝑥 ) of the FeTe/STO film. The Néel temperature of the 

antiferromagnetic transition is identified as 60 K (vertical dashed line). The green 

curve represents a fit to the ρxx (T) data for T < 3 0 K using the equation ρxx (T) = 

a1+b1T2+c1ln( T)+ d1T5, while the red curve shows a fit for T > 65 K with ρxx (T) = 

a2+b2ln( T). (B) Transverse resistivity ( 𝜌 𝑥𝑦 ) as a function of magnetic field ( B), 

measured at temperatures ranging from 12 K to 300 K. The temperatures are coded 

with colors, as indicated in ( D). The slanted dashed line demonstrates a linear fit of 

ρxy -B curve at high fields ( B > 12.5 T), with the y-intercept defining the residual Hall 

resistivity ( 𝜌 𝑥𝑦  

> 𝑟

). (C) Field dependence of the residual transverse resistivity ρxy after 

linear background subtraction. (D) Temperature dependence of 𝜌 𝑥𝑦  

> 𝑟

in FeTe/STO. 

Each data point is obtained from the linear fit of the corresponding color -coded ρxy -

B curve in ( B). (E) Scaling relation between 𝜌 𝑥𝑦  

> 𝑟

and 𝜌 𝑥𝑥 . (F) Logarithm scaling law 

between the absolute value of residual Hall conductivity |𝜎 𝑥𝑦  

> 𝑟

| and 𝜎 xx .Page 19 of 21 

Fig. 3. Thermal voltage and Hall coefficients of FeTe/STO . Temperature dependence of 

the low -field Hall coefficient ( 𝑅 𝐻 

> 𝐿𝑜𝑤

) (A) and the high -field Hall coefficient ( 𝑅 𝐻 

> 𝐻𝑖𝑔 ℎ

)

(B) extracted from the corresponding fitting ranges. Inset: Method for determining 

the Hall coefficients from the ρxy -B curve . 𝑅 𝐻 

> 𝐿𝑜𝑤

is extracted through linear fitting in 

the low -field range ( B < 4 T), while 𝑅 𝐻  

> 𝐻𝑖𝑔 ℎ

is obtained from linear fitting in the high -

field range (B > 12.5 T). (C), Schematic diagram of the thermoelectric transport 

measurement setup. The FeTe film is etched to create an isolate current heating 

section (right) and a carrier drift region (left). (D), Thermal voltage Vth of FeTe as a 

function of temperature. Positive and negative voltage values indicate electron and 

hole -dominated transport, respectively, with carrier -type transitions at 

approximately 45 K and 285 K. Page 20 of 21 

Fig. 4. Magnetic moment of FeTe/STO . (A) Field -dependent magnetization ( M) measured 

by a magnetometer with an out -of -plane magnetic field (B

∥ c) at various 

temperatures. (B) Magnetization ( M) vs B with a linear background subtracted . The 

temperature -color correspondence in the legend is shared by (A and B). (C)

Saturation magnetization ( MS) for B

∥ c as a function of temperature for the STO 

substrate (bottom panel), FeTe/STO (middle panel) and the difference between them 

(top panel), extracted from the intercepts of linear fits to the high -field range of the 

M (B) curves. (D) Temperature -dependent change in RMCD per unit field for 

FeTe/STO by linear fitting . The purple shadow is the guide for eyes. Page 21 of 21 

Fig. 5. Correlation between residual Hall resistivity and longitudinal resistivity. (A) 

Temperature dependence of the first derivative of the longitudinal resistivity, 

𝑑 𝜌 𝑥𝑥 𝑑 𝑇 ⁄ . The maximum at 48.3 K coinci des with the temperature at which the 

residual Hall 𝜌 𝑥𝑦  

> 𝑟

reaches its peak. (B) |𝜌 𝑥𝑦  

> 𝑟

| plotted as a function of 𝑑 𝜌 𝑥𝑥 𝑑𝑇 ⁄ at 

different temperatures. The data show a linear trend where the shadow represents a 

linear fit.