Title: 2604.12786v2.pdf

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.12786v2

Published Time: Fri, 17 Apr 2026 01:05:00 GMT

Number of Pages: 27

Markdown Content:
1

# Piezomagnetic Switching of Nonvolatile Antiferromagnetic States 

Xilai Bao 1,2† , Oleksandr V. Pylypovskyi 3,4† , Huali Yang 1*, Yali Xie 1*, Damien Faurie 5, Fatih 

Zighem 5, Sophie F. Weber 6,7 , Jiabin Wang 8, Jiachen Liang 1, Hong Xu 1,8 , Ruoan  Zou 1,2 ,

Huatao Jiang 1,2 , Dong Han 1, Pavlo Makushko 3, Xiaotao Wang 3, Lin Guo 3, Proloy T. Das 3,

Nicola A. Spaldin 6, Denys Makarov 3*, and Run -Wei Li 1,8 *

> 1

Zhejiang Province Key Laboratory of Magnetic Materials and Application Technology, 

Ningbo Institute of Materials Technology and Engineering,  Chinese Academy of Sciences, 

Ningbo 315201, P. R. China 

> 2

School of Future Technology, University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, P. 

R. China 

> 3

Helmholtz -Zentrum Dresden -Rossendorf e.V., Institute of Ion Beam Physics and Materials 

Research, 01328 Dresden, Germany 

> 4

Kyiv Academic University, Kyiv 03142, Ukraine 

> 5

LSPM -CNRS UPR3407, Université Sorbonne Paris Nord, 93430 Villetaneuse, France 

> 6

Materials Theory, ETH Zü rich, Wolfgang -Pauli -Strasse 27, 8093 Zü rich, Switzerland 

> 7

Chalmers University of Technology, 412 96 Gothenburg, Sweden 

> 8

Eastern Institute of Technology, Ningbo 315200, P. R. China 

† These authors contributed equally to this work .

* Corresponding authors:  yanghl@nimte.ac.cn  (Huali Yang),  xieyl@nimte.ac.cn  (Yali Xie), 

d.makarov@hzdr.de  (Denys Makarov),  rwli@eitech.edu.cn  (Run -Wei Li) 2

# Abstract 

Prospective spintronic memory and logic devices will benefit from the negligible stray 

field  and ultrafast magnetic dynamics inherent to antiferromagnets [1] . However, realizing 

isothermal, non -volatile, and deterministic switching of antiferromagnetic states remains a key 

challenge [2,3] . Here, we propose a piezomagnetic writing scheme in triangular Mn 3Ir -based 

memory cells, with readout achieved via the exchange bias effect. Our approach enables 

deterministic and nonvolatile switching of the antiferromagnetic states, which exhibit 

exceptional robustness against external perturbations. The switching mech anism is ascribed to 

piezomagnetic effect of Mn 3Ir combined with the interfacial Dzyaloshinskii -Moriya interaction 

at the antiferromagnet -ferromagnet interface. This scheme over comes the speed limitations 

imposed by conventional isothermal methods based on  isothermal crystallization mechanism [4] .

Our findings highlight the potential of piezomagnetic effects in designing advanced spintronic 

devices, providing an efficient pathway for manipulating antiferromagnetic states and 

developing energy -efficient memory technology. 3

# Introduction 

Compared to ferromagnets (FM), antiferromagnetic (AF) materials exhibit unique 

advantages including ultrafast dynamics, robustness against external fields and absence of stray 

fields, making them appealing candidates for high -density information storage an d THz 

spintronic devices [5 -7] . Noncollinear antiferromagnets, in particular, can exhibit ferromagnet -

like transport and optical phenomena, such as anomalous Hall effect (AHE) [8 -10]  and magneto -

optical responses [11,12] , owing to their complex spin textures  and reduced crystalline 

symmetries [1] . Thus, noncollinear antiferromagnets provide a compelling substitute for 

ferromagnets in prospective high -performance spintronic and spin -orbitronic devices [13,14] . To 

enable a reliable writing functionality as required for an AF memory, it is imperative to achieve 

deterministic control of the magnetic state of noncollinear antiferromagnets. Beyond the early 

success of current -induced control in collinear CuMnAs [15] , extensive efforts have also been 

dedicated to the det erministic manipulation of strongly noncollinear antiferromagnets. This can 

be achieved using spin -orbit torque (SOT) generated in adjacent heavy metals (HM) [9,16 -18] .

Based on these advances, all -antiferromagnetic tunnel junctions featuring information writing 

via SOT or spin transfer torque have been successfully fabricated [13,19,20] . As the typically 

utilized current -driven approaches involve substantial Joule heating potentially impacting the 

device reliability, there is an ongoing development of isothe rmal approaches to manipulate AF 

states, including magnetoelectrical effect [21 -23] , ionic liquid [24,25] , strain [2,26 -28]  and isothermal 

crystallization [4] .

Strain has been identified as an efficient tool to alter the AF states isothermally, featured 

by their low energy consumption and minimized Joule heating [28 -30] . The application of strain 

modulates the magnetic anisotropy via the magnetostrictive effect [30,31] , adjusts the magnetic 

transition temperature and can enhance multiferroic behavior [32,33] . Among these 

magnetoelastic effects, the piezomagnetic effect is characterized by a linear magneto -

mechanical coupling and is commonly observed in a variety of  noncollinear antiferromagnets, 

including Mn 3X (X = Ga, Sn, Pt, Ir) [2,26,32,34,35]  and antiperovskite materials (Mn 3NiN) [36] . These 

properties make piezomagnetism a beneficial approach for developing ultrafast and energy -

efficient AF spintronics [27,37] . However, nonvolatile control of AF states through strain has yet 

to be achieved, despite its significance for applications in AF memory and logic devices. The 

challenge stems from the fact that the manipulation of the direction of spins is closely associ ate d

with elastic deformations of the crystal lattice [38] , which indicates that the magnetic state returns 

to its original configuration when the strain is released [3,39] .4

Among the above antiferromagnets, Mn 3Ir stands out due to its exceptional thermal 

stability and proven technological relevance for spintronics [40,41] . Mn 3Ir is a triangular 

antiferromagnet characterized by the space group  Pm 3̅m (No. 221 with the cryst allographic 

point group m 3̅m) and magnetic point group  3̅m′. This noncollinear spin structure [4,40,42]  and 

strong spin -orbit coupling [12,43,44]  of Mn 3Ir enable an efficient spin manipulation through a large 

magnetoelastic effect. Here, we demonstrat e deterministic writing of binary information in an 

AF memory cell based on polycrystalline antiferromagnetic Mn 3Ir thin films (Fig. 1a). For a 

concise description of magnetic states of Mn 3Ir, we consider three vectors of magnetic moments 

within the unit cell, focusing on the compensated yet chiral  arrangement (Fig. 1b,d). The writing 

in AF bits is facilitated by breaking the energy symmetry b etween the two opposite AF domains 

through a tensile strain applied to Mn 3Ir (Fig. 1c,e), while the readout is enabled via the 

exchange bias (EB) effect provided by an adjacent FM layer of [Co/Pt] 3. We assign the AF state 

'' 1''  to the case when the magnetic hysteresis loop exhibits a positive perpendicular exchange 

bias field ( HPEB , Fig. 1f), and AF state  '' 0''  for a negative  HPEB  (Fig. 1g). We first demonstrate 

the continuous  '' write ''  and  '' read ''  behaviors using the above strategy through the measurement 

of the remanence values assessed via anomalous Hall measurements (Supporting Note 6). The 

reproducibility of this switching process is depicted in Fig. 1h, where we see that two AF states 

could be  set repeatedly under mechanic al strain and cyclic magnetic field. Our analytical and 

density functional theory (DFT) calculations reveal that the manipulation of AF states is due to 

the piezomagnetic effect in Mn 3Ir, assisted by interfacial Dzyaloshinskii -Moriya interaction 

(iDMI) at the AF/FM interface, which significantly reduces the energy barrier for the AF 

domain reversal. Moreover, owing to the pinning effect of the AF domains, the written AF 

states exhibit n onvolatility as well as exceptional robustness against external magnetic  field and 

mechanical strain. Our results demonstrate a novel approach for nonvolatile and precise 

manipulation of AF states in thin -film antiferromagnets, which is crucial for the fabrication of 

magnetoelectronic devices including energy efficient nonvola tile memories. 

# Result s

Structure analysis and strain characterization 

Mn 3Ir/[Co/Pt] 3 stacks were deposited on flexible 50 -μm-thick polyimide foils using 

magnetron sputtering at room temperature. High -resolution cross -sectional transmission 

electron microscopy (TEM) images reveal a (1 1 1) texture and a chemically disordered γ -Mn 3Ir 

phase [4,31] , which are further verified via small angle X -ray scattering (SAXS) spectrum 5

collected in the OOP geometry (Supporting Note 1). Additionally, the IP SAXS spectrum 

indicates that the Mn 3Ir layer is polycrystalline and there is no evidence that further 

crystallization happens in the film (Supporting Note 1). In this respect, our samples are distinct 

from the spontaneous exchange bias (SEB) effect through isothermal crystallization [4] , where 

the as -deposited amorphous Mn 3Ir layer transitioned into the crystallized phase after many 

hours. Consequently, the manipulation of the AF state i n our case is not related to the isothermal 

crystallization of the Mn 3Ir layer. 

To evaluate the impact of the tensile strain on the crystal structure of Mn 3Ir, OOP SAXS 

spectra were captured under different strains in situ and then averaged into 1D scattering spectra. 

A correlation between the scattering intensity and scattering angle under different tensile strains 

is depicted in Supporting Note 2. We observ e a reversible shift of the SAXS peak upon the 

application and release of tensile strain to the polyimide (maximal  εPI  = 3%), indicating elastic 

deformations in the metal layer sta ck. This elastic range was further verified by the surface 

morphology captured using scanning electron microscopy (SEM) (Supporting Note 2). Due to 

an incomplete strain transfer from the thin polymeric substrate to the metal layer stack [31] , the 

relative variation of the crystal parameters of Mn 3Ir along the stretching direction,  ε, is smaller 

than  εPI . In particular,  εPI  of 3% corresponds to  ε of 1.2% (Supporting Note 2). Hereafter, we 

use  ε as a representative parameter for the strain experienced by the metal layer stack. 

Deterministic manipulation of nonvolatile antiferromagnetic states via strain 

In our experiments, Mn 3Ir/[Co/Pt] 3 stacks were fabricated without applying any external 

magnetic field. The magnetic hysteresis loops of the as -deposited samples show a prominent 

perpendicular magnetic anisotropy and no loop shift (Supporting Note 3). The zero  HPEB 

indicates an equal distribution of AF domains within the Mn 3Ir layer. By stretching the sample 

at room temperature, with the [Co/Pt] 3 multilayers magnetized in an OOP magnetic field of  −2

kOe (the detailed process is in Supporting Note 4),  HPEB  develops instantly (Fig. 2a, upper 

panel). With increasing the tensile strain, the  HPEB  develops from zero and increases almost 

linearly to approximately 120 Oe at  ε = 1.2%  (Fig. 2c). The emergence of a non -zero  HPEB 

indicates the formation of a preferential Né el -vector configuration in Mn 3Ir, which is also 

observed by using MOKE microscopy (Supporting Note 5), AHE characterization (Supporting 

Note 6), and magnetometric hysteresis loop measurements (Supporting Note 7). 

Interestingly, the written AF state show nonvolatility upon release of the mechanical strain. 

As is shown in Fig. 2a (lower panel) and Fig. 2c, upon the removal of strain,  HPEB  remains 

unchanged. Noticeably, the nonvolatility of  HPEB  is intriguing in consideration of the relaxed 6

lattice structure in the unstrained sample (Supporting Note 2). Upon strain release, the recovery 

of the lattice structure should restore the bulk AF structures to their equilibrium state, thus 

eliminating preferential AF states and resulting in zero  HPEB . However, our results indicate that 

the stretching combined with the magnetized FM layer leads to the selection of a dominant AF 

domain that keeps its stability upon release. 

Our approach to manipulating the two AF states (Fig. 1b,d) is demonstrated in Fig. 2a -c

and Supporting Note 9. Specifically, by applying a tensile strain to a magnetized sample we 

achieve full control over the AF state of Mn 3Ir, which is read out by monitoring  HPEB . The AF 

state  '' 1''  (positive  HPEB ) and AF state  '' 0''  (negative  HPEB ) are obtained by down (up) 

magnetizing the sample, respectively. For demagnetized samples, the application of strain is 

unable to induce a preferential AF state in Mn 3Ir films,  giving rise to zero  HPEB  (Fig. 2b,c; 

Supporting Note 5). This result agrees with the common sense that strain (featuring with 

uniaxial symmetry) alone fails to drive the 180  degree s reversal of the AF order. 

The strain stability of the written AF states was tested by exposing sample to different 

tensile strains without external magnetic field (Fig. 2d). During measurement, the samples were 

set in the  '' parallel mode ''  (the Co magnetization is aligned with the magnetic field to set the AF 

state, Supporting Note 4). The results show that  HPEB  of the sample set in the  '' parallel mode '' 

is insensitive to mechanical deformations (the maximal variation is < 5%), indicating the strain 

stability of the written AF state . Moreover, we summarize the  HEB  deviation rate per tensile 

strain ( δ|HEB |/εstretch ) of reported EB systems (shown in Supporting Note 4), which reveal that 

our  HEB  exhibits superior strain stability among other EB systems. In addition to the MOKE 

measurements reported in Fig. 2d, this strain stability is confirmed also using AHE 

characterization (Supporting Note 6), emphasizing its great potential to be integrated i n

advanced flexible electronics to realize strain -invariant magnetic field sensors [45,46] .

The robustness of the strain -induced manipulation of the AF state against an external 

perturbing magnetic field is demonstrated in Fig. 2e,f and Supporting Note 7. Specifically, 

positive magnetic field pulses were applied to the sample in the AF state  '' 1'' , while negative 

magnetic -field pulses were applied to the sample exhibiting AF state  '' 0'' . After each field pulse, 

a FM hysteresis loop was measured to probe the state of Mn 3Ir. For the sample set in the AF 

state  '' 1'' , the magnitude of  HPEB  varies by about 7% when a perturbing magnetic field of 60 

kOe is applied, whereas for the AF state  '' 2'' , the variation is approximately 10%. Similarly, 

negative magnetic field pulses applied to the sample in AF state  '' 1''  result in a variation of about 

3% in  HPEB  (Supporting Note 7). Overall, the written AF states are quite stable when under 7

large perturbing magnetic fields that are substantially large enough to switch the FM layer of 

our samples (about 800 Oe). 

Mechanism of setting AF states via piezomagnetism and interfacial Dzyaloshinskii -

Moriya interaction 

Fig. 3a depicts the initial stages of the time evolution of  HPEB  of the samples exposed to 

different tensile strains (see also Supporting Note 10). We vary the stretching step size while 

increasing the strain from 0 to 1.2% and collect magnetic hysteresis loops to assess the variation 

of  HPEB  as a function of both time and strain. It could be inferred from Fig. 3a that the 

manipulation of the AF state is independent of the stretching step size and magnetizing time, 

i.e. 120 Oe  HPEB  can be achieved by a sing le -step stretching or step -wise increase of strain to 

1.2%, and remains stable regardless of magnetizing time. This phenomenon is attributed to the 

negligible effect of isothermal crystallization and thermal activations [47]  on the spin structure of 

Mn 3Ir. By adopting the stretching strategy composed of a single stretching step and accelerating 

the stretching rate, the AF state could be manipulated within 1 second (Supporting Note 10). 

The emergence of the faster manipulation of the AF state stands in st ark contrast to the 

isothermal crystallization mechanism, which is responsible for SEB [4,48] , where achieving a 

substantial  HPEB  necessitates prolonged magnetizing time. 

For comparison, the SEB effect governed by isothermal crystallization is demonstrated in 

Fig. 3b and Supporting Note 12, where the samples are exposed to a tensile strain throughout 

the entire measuring period of many hours. The  time dependence of  HPEB  is fitted according to 

the Kolmogorov -Avrami model as  HPEB ∝(1  − 2e−(t/τ)β

), where  τ and  β are the characteristic 

relaxation time and exponent of the domain relaxation, respectively [49] . With  β = 0.035,  the 

characteristic time  τ drops from about 4800 h for  ε = 0.0% to about 680 h at  ε = 1.2% 

(Supporting Note 12). We also note the exponentially fast rate of setting the  HPEB  at the very 

beginning of the process (Fig. 3c): to reach half of the maximal measured value at 1.2% strain, 

we need only about 30 min. 

To understand the rapid onset of  HPEB , we perform DFT calculations and micromagnetic 

analysis of the magnetic state of a single grain of Mn 3Ir with the crystallographic axes aligned 

to the direction of applied strain (Fig. 3d, Supporting Note 11). First, we note shift of the EB 

loop is opposite in opposite AF domains, see Fig. 1f,g. Thus, in the multidomain film with about 

equal distribution o f AF domains, there will be a finite coercivity, but zero  HPEB . We stretch the 

multilayer sample with single -domain -state ferromagnet magnetized by a magnetic field, and 

this selects the energetically preferred AF domain. 8

The state of the Mn 3Ir unit cell is determined by the directions of the Mn moments in  its 

three magnetic sublattices,  M1,2,3 , which are recast into two orthogonal unitless Né el vectors  n1

= ( M2 − M1)/( √3M0),  n2 = (2 M3 − M1 − M2)/(3 M0), and the total magnetization  M = ∑ Mi 

> 3
> i=1

,

where  M0 is the saturation magnetization of each of magnetic  sublattices in the absence of strain 

(Supporting Note 11). In the ground state  |n1,2 | = 1. We simulate the experimental  situation by 

applying an IP uniaxial strain parallel to one of the IP hexagonal lattice vectors, here  x̂ for 

concreteness  up to  ε = 5% (Fig. 3d). The mechanical and magnetic degrees of freedom are 

relaxed and the value of magnetic moments in each of the three sublattices of Mn ions is 

quantified. We found a linear increase of the sublattice moments  M1,2,3  with strain (Fig. 3e). 

The total moment  M shows two features. There is an almost strain -independent OOP 

component  Mz ≈ 0.02  μB driven by the intrinsic DMI in Mn 3Ir (Fig. 3f), which is also present 

at zero strain with the sign of  Mz set by the selected AF domain. The IP magnetization 

component perpendicular to the strain direction,  My, reveals piezomagnetism of Mn 3Ir. This IP 

component increases with strain because of a tilt of sublattices due to mechanical distortions 

(Fig. 3f). The DFT -calculated strain -driven change in  M1,2,3  leads to an increase in the N éel 

vectors (Fig. 3g) as the following equation (Supporting Note 11): 

n1,2 (ε) = 1 + aε ± my(ε)

2 (1)

where  a ≈ 1 for Mn 3Ir is a constant that generally depends on the exchange and 

magnetomechanical coupling of the particular antiferromagnet, and  my = My/(3 M0) is the IP 

magnetization normalized. The last term reflects the strain -driven deviation from the ground -

state directions of the magnetic sublattices. 

A standard phenomenological model of the interfacial exchange coupling proposed by 

Slonczewski [50,51]  considers the coupling between the OOP Co magnetization,  mF, and the 

uncompensated moment,  Mz, of Mn 3Ir, which is strain insensitive (Fig. 3f), while the in -plane 

magnetization of piezomagnetic origin is averaged to zero.  Thus , this model is not sufficient to 

explain the experimentally observed features of the exchange bias. We take into account the 

iDMI [52 -54] , which couples  mF with the IP components of the N éel vectors through 

FiDMI  ∝ mF 

> z

(n1x  + √3n1y  − √3n1y  + n2y ) (2)

where  FiDMI  is the energy of the inter -layer coupling. The piezomagnetic change of the N éel 

vectors (1) leads to an effective increase of iDMI coupling of about 1%. For a general 

orientation of the Mn 3Ir grain, the piezomagnetic response is reduced upon misalignment 

between the crystallographic axes and the strain direction, but remains non -zero (Supporting 9

Note 11). We note in the case of randomly oriented grains the effectively zero net magnetization 

of piezomagnetic origin does not contribute to the development of PEB because the key role is 

played by the elongation  of magnetic sublattices under tensile strain, but not their mutual tilt. 

In summary, stretching in a magnetic field selects ferromagnetic domain, the energy barrier 

between oppositely ordered AF domains is then lowered by about 1% due to iDMI, facilitating 

switching of AF domains that have highe r energy due to unfavorable orientation with respect 

to the ferromagnetic layer and causing persistent bias after release of the strain when the energy 

barrier depth is restored preventing further AF switching. 

This theoretical estimate of the AF switching barrier between the opposite AF domains by 

about 1% is comparable with the characteristic change of the energy barrier given by the 

Arrhenius -Néel law of about 4% based on the attempt frequency estimates in Mn 3Ir [4]  and 

characteristic time  τ extracted from the Kolmogorov -Avrami model see Fig. 3h and Supporting 

Note 12. An additional decrease of the energy barrier can be related to further changes of the 

exchange and anisotropy energies in Mn 3Ir and [Co/Pt] 3 laye rs as well as the Co magnetization 

in the film that forces easier depinning of AF domain walls in Mn 3Ir. Attributed to the reduced 

energy barrier through the strain -mediated iDMI effect, the AF states can be established as soon 

as mechanical strain is applied. As shown in Supporting Note 12, our approach overcomes the 

speed limitations imposed by conventi onal isothermal methods based on isothermal 

crystallization mechanism. We envision that our approach can be extended to AF/FM systems 

prepared on piezoelec tric substrates enabling much faster manipulation of AF states through 

electrical field [27] .

# Discussion and outlooks 

In practical memory applications, the ability to extend a memory cell into memory arrays 

have to be evaluated. We propose two possible schemes for multi -cell writing process, one of 

which is demonstrated. As is shown in Fig. 4a, we extend the single memory  cell to an example 

array of 16 memory units, the memory cells are read out by measuring the AHE signals. Here, 

we demonstrate a two -step multi -cell write scheme, with the cells 1, 2, 3, 4 written into the 

binary information of  '' 1'' , '' 0'' , '' 1'' , '' 0'' , respectively. To do that, we first polarize the FM layer 

of each cell with predefined magnetic field (i.e., with cells 1 and 3 magnetized downward, cells 

2 and 4 magnetized upward). Afterwards, the substrate is stretched to  ε = 1.2% and then released 

to mechanically relaxed state, this allows to switch the AF layer into the desired moment 

direction. The viability of this scheme is verified by reading out the status of the written AFM 10 

cells. As is shown in Fig. 4b, the AHE curves of cells 1 -4 indeed represent the binary 

information of  '' 1'' , '' 0'' , '' 1'' , '' 0'' , respectively. The binary information is also decoded by the 

HPEB  indicated in the AHE curves. Our results thus demonstrate a simultaneous and 

deterministic manipulation of different AF states within the array through a magnetization -

stretch operation, which avoided the collective switching of the memory cells. Furthermore, by 

replacing the permanent magnets with magnetic write he ads, the AF bit size can be reduced to 

the nanoscale, which satisfies the size requirements for AF tunneling magnetoresistence (TMR) 

arrays. Alternatively, considering a rather high remanent magnetization of the FM layer, the 

formation of a preferential AF  state can be readily achieved  even in the absence of an external 

magnetic field, provided that the [Co/Pt] 3 multilayers have been magnetized prior to stretching 

(Supporting Note 8). This opens an appealing possibility to use SOT -based switching of the 

FM  layer to manipulate the AF state all -electrically without the need for magnetic fields [55] . In 

another possible scheme, the AF cells could be written by overall magnetization followed by 

localized strain excitation, although at present it faces critical challenges of applying a large yet 

localized strain to obtain a sizable effect. This also dr ives further extrapolation of new AF 

systems that exhibit higher mechanical switching efficiency. Furthermore, as our approach is 

also valid in systems featuring with in -plane (IP) magnetic anisotropy (Supporting Note 13), 

the piezomagnetic manipulation of  the AF state in AF/FM stacks presents a novel method to 

introduce tailorable exchange bias effect in flexible magnetic field sensors, expanding 

applicability of our approach to smart wearable electronics. For example, arranging 

mechanically flexible magne tic field sensors in Wheatstone bridges (a specific circuit 

architecture used for high -precision sensing) offers major enhancement in their sensitivity and 

thermal stability yet is rather challenging in fabrication relying on established methods due to 

the  necessity of having opposite exchange bias fields in the neighboring AF/FM -based spin 

valve units [56] . As our approach does not rely on high processing temperatures, it is particularly 

well suited for the realization of Wheatstone bridges of flexible magnetic sensors, which not 

only simplifies the fabrication process and enhances production efficiency, bu t also prevents 

the generation of Joule heating (Supporting Note 13). 

# Conclusion 

In conclusion, we report an isothermally nonvolatile and deterministic switching of AF 

states in triangular Mn 3Ir thin films in proximity to a FM  [Co/Pt] 3 multilayer. DFT and 

micromagnetic analysis reveal that the underlying mechanisms are piezomagnetism of Mn 3Ir 11 

and the iDMI effect at the AF/FM interface. These couplings effectively reduce the energy 

barrier for Mn 3Ir domain switching by about 4%, thereby overcoming the speed limitation of 

conventional isothermal approaches relying on isothermal crystallization. Furthermore, the 

strain -manipulated AF states exhibit excellent robustness against external perturbations  such as 

magnetic field and external strain. Our approach is valid in both OOP and IP systems, thus 

facilitating the development of interactive flexible  electronics and energy -efficient isothermal 

spintronic memories. 

# Methods 

Fabrication  process 

Multilayers with perpendicular magnetic anisotropy (PMA) consist of 

Ta(4)/Pt(2)/Mn 3Ir(6)/[Co(0.6)/Pt(1)] 3/Pt(1) stacks (in brackets, the thicknesses of individual 

layers is indicated in nm). In the stacks, Ta/Pt layers served as a buffer layer to diminish a 

surface roughness of the polymeric foil and favor the growth of Mn 3Ir layer with the  (1  1 1) 

texture. The AF layer Mn 3Ir (6 nm) was sufficiently thick to induce a pronounced interfacial 

coupling effect. [Co/Pt] 3 multilayer stack is a FM layer. A capping layer of Pt (2 nm) was 

deposited to prevent the multilayers from oxidation. These samples were deposited  on 50  μm

thick PI foils (Wuxi Baike Electronic Materials, China) at room temperature using a DC 

magnetron sputtering (Adnano -tek, China) in an Ar atmosphere (Ar pressure: 3  ×10 −3 mbar) in 

a chamber with a base pressure of less than 5  × 10 −7 mbar. The dimensions of the PI foils are 

10  × 30 mm 2, and the metal multilayers were grown in a shape of a circle with the diameter of 

6 mm using a mask template. The absence of an external magnetic field during deposition 

induces zero perpendicular exchange bias field  (HPEB ) in the as -deposited samples. The 

thickness of each layer was determined through the control of the deposition time at the 

measured deposition rate of 0.034 nm/s (50 W) for Ta, 0.062 nm/s (50 W) for Pt, 0.053 nm/s 

(80 W) for Mn 3Ir, and  0.032 nm/s (50 W) for Co. 

An array of units for the AHE characterization was fabricated through lift -off processes 

and sputtering deposition. A photoresist layer was spin coated on the PI substrate, then the 

electrodes and circuits were patterned at room temperature through UV lith ography (MA6, 

SUSS MicroTec, Germany). Following the lithography, the electrode layer composed of Pt  (50 

nm) was deposited via magnetron sputtering. The multilayer st acks with PMA consisting of 

Ta(4)/Pt(2)/Mn 3Ir(6)/[Co(0.6)/Pt(1)] 3/Pt(1) stacks (in bracket s, the thicknesses of individual 12 

layers is indicated in nm) were patterned into four units and deposited through the same 

procedures. 

Structural  characterization 

Cross -sectional TEM images were captured using a cold -field TEM (CFTEM, F200, JEOL, 

Japan). The images were used to characterize the crystal structure and texture of the samples. 

The TEM samples were prepared through a Focused Ion Beam (FIB, Auriga, German y) etching. 

The crystal quality was estimated by X -Ray Diffraction (XRD, D8 Discover, Bruker, Germany) 

and Small Angle X -Ray Scattering (SAXS, Xeuss 3.0, UHR, France) with Cu K α (λ = 1.541  Å)

radiation. 

SAXS Measurement . For each SAXS pattern, the exposure time was 10 min. The 2D 

scattering patterns are ring -shaped. Therefore, 1D diffraction curves were obtained by 

averaging the scattering intensity within the scattering plane shown in 2D SAXS patterns. The 

averaging equ ation to obtain the 1D diffraction curves is shown below :

Iav (q) =

∫ Iϕ(q)d ϕ

> ϕ1
> ϕ2

|ϕ2 − ϕ1| (3)

In equation ( 3),  q is the scattering vector,  I represent s the scattering intensity,  ϕ1 and  ϕ2 denote 

the central angle within the scattering plane,  ϕ is defined as the central angle between the chosen 

direction to the stretching direction. The relationship between the diffraction angle 2 θ and  q is 

given by the equation :

q = 4π sin θ

λ (4)

The geometry of the 2D scattering pattern is shown in Supporting Note 1.  According to the 

equations ( 3) and ( 4), the OOP 1D diffraction curves were calculated by selecting the entire 

scattering plane ( ϕ1 = 0 °, ϕ2 = 360 °). 1D diffraction curves parallel to the scattered wave vector 

were calculated by selecting the central angle range of  ϕ1 = 5 °and  ϕ2 = 5 °.

Peak Fitting . The XSACT software is used to search for approximate positions of the 

certain texture through  Lorentz fitting. The positions are input into the ORIGIN software to fit 

the peaks more accurately. The fitting is done to the Lorentz function. This peak fitting method 

is available for both XRD curves and 1D SAXS curves. 

Calculation of Crystal Parameter . Only the Mn 3Ir texture is visible in XRD and SAXS 

patterns, owing to the polycrystalline states and thin profiles of other layers. By taking the 13 

crystal structure of Mn 3Ir (FCC) into consideration, the crystal parameter of the Mn 3Ir layer ( dc)

was calculated as follows: 

dc = λ√a2 + b2 + c2

2sin θ

(5)

In equation (3), the parameters  a, b and  c represent indices of the crystal plane,  λ denotes the 

wavelength of the X -ray beam ( λ = 1.541  Å),  θ is half of the diffraction angle or scattering angle 

of the peak. 

Magnetic  measurements 

The magnetic properties of the samples were measured using a Superconducting Quantum 

Interference Device Vibrating Sample Magnetometer (SQUID -VSM, Quantum Design, USA), 

a differential polar -MOKE magnetometry system with commercial microscope (MOKE, Evico 

Magnetics, Germany), and a MOKE Microscopy (KMPL -Spin -X, Truth Instruments, China). 

The Anomalous Hall Effect (AHE) measurements were carried out using a custom -built 

magnetoresistive system composed of a Tensormeter setup (HZDR Innovation GmbH, 

Germany), a nd a Physical Property Measurement System -Magnetoresistance Measurement 

(PPMS -MM, Quantum Design, USA). 

SQUID . The magnetic anisotropy was estimated by measuring IP and OOP hysteresis 

loops. Before the measurement, the deposited samples (6 mm diameter circle) were cut into 3 

× 3 mm 2 pieces to fit the sample holder of the SQUID magnetometer. The dimensions of the 

cut sample were measured using a commercial micrometer. The cut -out area was located at the 

center of the original sample. The IP and OOP hysteresis loops were obtained by fi xing the 

sample plane parallel and perpendicular to the magnetic field, respe ctively. The measuring 

temperature was fixed at room temperature (300 K) and the maximum magnetic field was large 

enough to saturate the sample. The hysteresis loops of the samples were obtained after 

subtracting the paramagnetic signal. 

MOKE Magnetometry and Microscopy . OOP hysteresis loops were obtained by a 

MOKE magnetometry at room temperature under an OOP magnetic field generated through 

electromagnets powered by a quadrupolar power  supply. The reported normalized 

magnetization corresponds to the normalized Kerr signal. From the normalized hysteresis loops 

we calculated  HC and  HPEB . The magnetic domain patterns were recorded through a MOKE 

microscopy at room temperature under an OOP magnetic field generated through 14 

electromagnets powered by a dipolar power supply. During the measurement, the applied 

magnetic field was varied and a magnetic domain pattern was automatically captured. 

Magnetotransport . The AHE curves of the sample composed of [PI 

foil]//Ta(2)/Pt(4)/Mn 3Ir(6)/[Co(0.6)/Pt(1)] 3/Pt(1) (numbers in brackets are given in nm) were 

recorded through a custom -built magnetoresistive system. We used four -point probe method to 

measure the AHE of the sample, and the applied magnetic field was perpendicular to the film 

surface. The detailed  configuration of the measurement and the method to remove the offset 

can be referred to Supporting Note 6. 

Magnetoresistance . For the measurement for each unit, magnetoresistance (MR) curves 

were measured via a four -point method with the measuring system consisting of a current 

source (B2912B, Keysight), a nanovoltmeter (2182A, Keithley) and a pair of electromagnets. 

During the  measurement, the current  J generated by the current source and the magnetic field 

produced by the electromagnets were applied parallel to the pinning direction if not specified 

otherwise. The full GMR loop was measured by applying magneti c field large enough to fully 

switch the magnetic moment of the reference layer. The minor GMR loop was measured by 

applying magnetic field sufficient to switch the magnetic moment of the free layer but not 

strong enough to switch the reference layer. The  voltage  U across the sample was measured 

using a nanovoltmeter. The resistance  R of the sample was calculated as  R = U/I. The MR was 

calculated as: 

MR  = R − Rmin 

Rmin 

(6)

Rmin  was obtained after subtracting the linear background. 

Strain application 

For the samples deposited on PI foils with the dimensions of 10  × 30 mm 2, the tensile 

strain was applied through a custom -built tensile stretcher. By fixing the PI foils using grippers 

at the initial distance  d0 of 10 mm, the tensile strain was applied by stretching the sample to a 

distance  d. The strain applied on the PI foil was calculated as  εPI  = ( d − d0)/ d0. The strain was 

applied at the stretching speed of 5  μm/s if not noted otherwise. 

DFT simulations 

For DFT calculations of Mn 3Ir, we employ the Vienna  ab initio  simulation package 

(VASP) [57] , using the generalized gradient approximation with the Perdew -Burke -Ernzerhof 

(PBE) functional [58] . We include spin -orbit coupling (SOC) self -consistently in all of our 15 

calculations, and initialize the Mn magnetic moments in their noncollinear antiferromagnetic 

ground -state order, with IP triplets of Mn moments rotated 120 degrees relative to each other. 

We use the Projector -augmented -wave (PAW) method [59]  using the standard VASP PAW 

pseudopotentials, and take Ir : 5 d86s1 and Mn : 3 p63d64s1 electrons as valence. We use a 

Gamma -centered 10  × 10  × 8 reciprocal mesh to sample the Brillouin zone and an 800  eV 

kinetic energy cutoff for our plane -wave basis set. We then allow at omic positions and the 

lengths of the unit cell orthogonal to the direction of applied strain to relax until forces on atoms 

are  again less than 0.01 eV/ Å, and the stresses are below a stopping criterion which is internally 

scaled in VASP based  on the selected force value. The relaxed lattice parameters for the 

hexagonal unit cell (which we use rather than the cubic cell for convenience, since in the 

hexagonal basis the Mn moments lie perfectly parallel to the a -b plane) are  a = 5.25  Å and  c =

6.44  Å.

In the calculations of Mn 3Ir’s piezomagnetic response, for a given percent of uniaxial 

strain we fix one IP lattice constant to the desired, strained length. We then allow atomic 

positions and the lengths of the unit cell orthogonal to the direction of applied strain to relax 

until  forces on atoms are again less than 0.01 eV/ Å. Finally, we calculate  the magnetization 

density projected onto the Mn atoms using the relaxed, strained structures. 

Phenomenological description of the temporal evolution of exchange bias 

The magnetic state of Mn 3Ir was described based on the so -called spin frame [60] . The unit 

cell is characterized by three magnetic vectors: two Né el vectors  n1,2  that are orthogonal in the 

ground state, and magnetization. Based on  the magnetic symmetry of Mn 3Ir, we derive the 

expression for the phenomenological magnetic energy that includes the uniform exchange, 

anisotropy, and Dzyaloshinskii -Moriya interaction (DMI). In particular, the latter leads to the 

development of a finite OOP magnetization along 3 z axis. The coupling between Mn 3Ir and 

perpendicularly magnetized Co can be described via the interfacial DMI [50,53,54]  that depends on 

the direction of magnetization of Co and the direction of  n1,2 , but not the uncompensated 

magnetization, see Supporting Note 11 for details. 

A finite strain in Mn 3Ir strongly alters the magnetic subsystem. This includes 

modifications of the exchange interactions and appearance of a finite magnetization of the 

piezomagnetic origin. The change of the uniform exchange is reflected in the elongation of 

magnetic moments  and, respectively, the Né el vectors. An enhancement of the interfacial DMI 

coupling due to the change of  n1,2  alters energy barriers for the spontaneous relaxation of the 

magnetic system, that can be described by the model proposed in  Ref. Xi  et al .[49] . The change 16 

of the energy barrier calculated based on the exchange bias field measured experimentally is 

matches the theoretical prediction fairly well (Supporting Note 12). 

# Data availability 

All data that support the plots within this paper and other findings of this study are available 

from the corresponding authors upon reasonable request. Source data are provided with this 

paper. 

# Acknowledgements 

This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China (U24A6001, 

52522108, U23A20551, 12474126, 52371205, 52127803), Zhejiang Provincial Natural Science 

Foundation of China (LD24E010001), the Ningbo Key Scientific and Technological Pr oject 

(2024Z147), the European Commission HORIZON RIA (project REGO; ID: 101070066) and 

ERC grant 3DmultiFerro (project number: 101141331). Computational resources for the DFT 

calculations were provided by ETH Z ürich’s EULER cluster (project ID: eth3). 

# Author contributions 

X. Bao, O.V. Pylypovskyi, H. Yang, Y. Xie, D. Makarov and R. -W. Li conceived the project 

idea. X. Bao, H. Yang,  Y. Xie, J. Wang, D. Makarov and R. -W. Li designed the experiments. 

H. Yang, Y. Xie, D. Makarov and R. -W. Li supervised the project. X. Bao fabricated the 

materials and conducted the measurements. O.V. Pylypovskyi conducted micromagnetic 

analysis. S.F. Webe r and N.A. Spaldin performed DFT calculations and respective data analysis. 

D. Faurie, F. Zighem and X. Wang provided the data and analysis of strain distributions. P. 

Makushko, L. Guo, P.T. Das, X. Hong contributed to the electromagnetic measurements. J. 

Liang, R. Zou, H. Jiang and D. Han contributed to the fabrication of Wheatstone bridge. X. Bao, 

O.V. Pylypovskyi, H. Yang, N.A. Spaldin, D. Makarov and R. -W. Li wrote and revised the 

manuscript with inputs from all authors. All authors discussed the result s and provided 

comments on the manuscript. 

# Competing interests 

The authors declare no competing interests. 17 

# Reference s

[1]  B.  H.  Rimmler , B.  Pal,  and  S.  S.  P.  Parkin,  Non -collinear  antiferromagnetic  spintronics, 

Nat . Rev . Mater . 10 , 109  (2025). 

[2]  M.  Ikhlas,  S.  Dasgupta,  F.  Theuss,  T.  Higo,  S.  Kittaka,  B.  J.  Ramshaw,  O.  Tchernyshyov, 

C.  W.  Hicks,  and  S.  Nakatsuji,  Piezomagnetic  switching  of  the  anomalous  Hall  effect  in 

an  antiferromagnet  at  room  temperature,  Nat . Phys . 18 , 1086  (2022). 

[3]  I.  J.  Park,  T.  Lee,  P.  Das,  B.  Debnath,  G.  P.  Carman,  and  R.  K.  Lake,  Strain  control  of  the 

Néel  vector  in  Mn -based  antiferromagnets,  Appl . Phys . Lett . 114 , 142403  (2019). 

[4]  A.  Migliorini,  B.  Kuerbanjiang,  T.  Huminiuc,  D.  Kepaptsoglou,  M.  Mu ñoz,  J.  L.  F.  Cu ñado, 

J.  Camarero,  C.  Aroca,  G.  Vallejo -Fern ández,  V.  K.  Lazarov,  and  J.  L.  Prieto,  Spontaneous 

exchange  bias  formation  driven  by  a structural  phase  transition  in  the  antiferromagnetic 

material,  Nat . Mater . 17 , 28  (2018). 

[5]  P.  Qin,  H.  Yan,  X.  Wang,  H.  Chen,  Z.  Meng,  J.  Dong,  M.  Zhu,  J.  Cai,  Z.  Feng,  X.  Zhou,  L. 

Liu,  T.  Zhang,  Z.  Zeng,  J.  Zhang,  C.  Jiang,  and  Z.  Liu,  Room -temperature 

magnetoresistance  in  an  all -antiferromagnetic  tunnel  junction,  Nature  613 , 485  (2023). 

[6]  X.  Chen,  T.  Higo,  K.  Tanaka,  T.  Nomoto,  H.  Tsai,  H.  Idzuchi , M.  Shiga,  S.  Sakamoto,  R. 

Ando,  H.  Kosaki,  T.  Matsuo,  D.  Nishio -Hamane,  R.  Arita,  S.  Miwa,  and  S.  Nakatsuji, 

Octupole -driven  magnetoresistance  in  an  antiferromagnetic  tunnel  junction,  Nature  613 ,

490  (2023). 

[7]  W. -B.  Lee,  S.  Hwang,  H. -W.  Ko,  B. -G.  Park,  K. -J.  Lee,  and  G. -M.  Choi,  Spin -torque -

driven  gigahertz  magnetization  dynamics  in  the  non -collinear  antiferromagnet  Mn 3Sn,  Nat .

Nanotechnol . 20 , 487  (2025). 

[8]  S.  Nakatsuji,  N.  Kiyohara , and  T.  Higo,  Large  anomalous  Hall  effect  in  a non -collinear 

antiferromagnet  at  room  temperature,  Nature  527 , 212  (2015). 

[9]  S.  Arpaci,  V.  Lopez -Dominguez,  J.  Shi,  L.  Sánchez -Tejerina,  F.  Garesci,  C.  Wang,  X.  Yan, 

V.  K.  Sangwan,  M.  A.  Grayson,  M.  C.  Hersam,  G.  Finocchio,  and  P.  Khalili  Amiri, 

Observation  of  current -induced  switching  in  non -collinear  antiferromagnetic  IrMn 3 by 

differential  voltage  measurements,  Nat . Commun . 12 , 3828  (2021). 

[10]  L.  šmejkal,  A.  H.  MacDonald,  J.  Sinova,  S.  Nakatsuji , and  T.  Jungwirth,  Anomalous  Hall 

antiferromagnets,  Nat . Rev . Mater . 7, 482  (2022). 18 

[11]  H.  Meer,  F.  Schreiber,  C.  Schmitt,  R.  Ramos,  E.  Saitoh,  O.  Gomonay,  J.  Sinova,  L.  Baldrati, 

and  M.  Kl äui , Direct  imaging  of  current -induced  antiferromagnetic  switching  revealing  a

pure  thermomagnetoelastic  switching  mechanism  in  NiO,  Nano  Lett . 21 , 114  (2021). 

[12]  K.  T.  Yamada,  K.  Yamaguchi,  Y.  Kobayashi,  Y.  Takamura,  H.  Munekata , T.  Ono,  T. 

Moriyama,  and  T.  Satoh,  Magneto -optical  kerr  effect  of  noncollinear  antiferromagnetic 

Mn 3Ir  films,  AIP  Adv . 14 , 085020  (2024). 

[13]  J.  Shi,  S.  Arpaci,  V.  Lopez -Dominguez,  V.  K.  Sangwan,  F.  Mahfouzi,  J.  Kim,  J.  G.  Athas, 

M.  Hamdi,  C.  Aygen,  H.  Arava,  C.  Phatak,  M.  Carpentieri,  J.  S.  Jiang,  M.  A.  Grayson,  N. 

Kioussis,  G.  Finocchio,  M.  C.  Hersam,  and  P.  Khalili  Amiri,  Electrically  controlled  all -

antiferromagnetic  tunnel  junctions  on  silicon  with  large  room -temperature 

magnetoresistance,  Adv . Mater . 36 , 2312008  (2024). 

[14]  L.  Wernert,  B.  Pradenas,  O.  Tchernyshyov,  and  H.  Chen,  Hall  mass  and  transverse  noether 

spin  currents  in  noncollinear  antiferromagnets,  Phys . Rev . Lett . 134 , 016706  (2025). 

[15]  P.  Wadley,  B.  Howells,  J.  Železn ý, C.  Andrews,  V.  Hills,  R.  P.  Campion,  V.  Novak,  K. 

Olejnik,  F.  Maccherozzi,  S.  S.  Dhesi,  S.  Y.  Martin,  T.  Wagner,  J.  Wunderlich,  F.  Freimuth, 

Y.  Mokrousov,  J.  Kune š, J.  S.  Chauhan,  M.  J.  Grzybowski,  A.  W.  Rushforth,  K.  W. 

Edmonds,  B.  L.  Gallagher,  and  T.  Jungwirth,  Electrical  switching  of  an  antiferromagnet, 

Science  351 , 587  (2016). 

[16]  J. -Y.  Yoon,  P.  Zhang,  C. -T.  Chou,  Y.  Takeuchi,  T.  Uchimura,  J.  T.  Hou,  J.  Han,  S.  Kanai, 

H.  Ohno,  S.  Fukami,  and  L.  Liu,  Handedness  anomaly  in  a non -collinear  antiferromagnet 

under  spin –orbit  torque,  Nat . Mater . 22 , 1106  (2023). 

[17]  Z.  Zheng,  L.  Jia,  Z.  Zhang,  Q.  Shen,  G.  Zhou,  Z.  Cui,  L.  Ren,  Z.  Chen,  N.  F.  Jamaludin,  T. 

Zhao,  R.  Xiao,  Q.  Zhang,  Y.  Du,  L.  Liu,  S.  Grade čak,  K.  S.  Novoselov,  W.  Zhao,  X.  Xu, 

Y.  Zhang,  and  J.  Chen,  All -electrical  perpendicular  switching  of  chiral  antiferromagnetic 

order,  Nat . Mater . 24 , 1407  (2025). 

[18]  Y.  Takeuchi,  Y.  Sato,  Y.  Yamane,  J. -Y.  Yoon,  Y.  Kanno,  T.  Uchimura,  K.  V.  De  Zoysa,  J. 

Han,  S.  Kanai,  J.  Ieda,  H.  Ohno,  and  S.  Fukami , Electrical  coherent  driving  of  chiral 

antiferromagnet,  Science  389 , 830  (2025). 

[19]  J.  Shi,  V.  Lopez -Dominguez,  F.  Garesci,  C.  Wang,  H.  Almasi,  M.  Grayson,  G.  Finocchio, 

and  P.  Khalili  Amiri,  Electrical  manipulation  of  the  magnetic  order  in  antiferromagnetic 

PtMn  pillars,  Nat . Electron . 3, 92  (2020). 19 

[20]  J.  Kang,  M.  Hamdi,  S.  K.  Cheung,  L. -D.  Yuan,  M.  Elekhtiar,  W.  Rogers,  A.  Meo,  P.  G. 

Lim,  M.  N.  Tey,  A.  D’Addario,  S.  T.  Konakanchi,  E.  Matt,  J.  Athas,  S.  Arpaci,  L.  Wan,  S. 

C.  Mehta,  P.  Upadhyaya,  M.  Carpentieri,  V.  P.  Dravid,  M.  C.  Hersam,  J.  A.  Katine,  G.  D. 

Fuchs,  G.  Finocchio,  E.  Y.  Tsymbal,  J.  M.  Rondinelli,  and  P.  K.  Amiri,  Octupole -driven 

spin -transfer  torque  switching  of  all -antiferromagnetic  tunnel  junctions,  ArXiv  e-prints 

10.48550/arXiv.2509.03026  (2025). 

[21]  J.  T.  Heron,  J.  L.  Bosse,  Q.  He,  Y.  Gao,  M.  Trassin,  L.  Ye,  J.  D.  Clarkson,  C.  Wang,  J.  Liu, 

S.  Salahuddin,  D.  C.  Ralph,  D.  G.  Schlom,  J.  Íñ iguez,  B.  D.  Huey,  and  R.  Ramesh, 

Deterministic  switching  of  ferromagnetism  at  room  temperature  using  an  electric  field, 

Nature  516 , 370  (2014). 

[22]  T.  Kosub,  M.  Kopte,  R.  Hühne,  P.  Appel,  B.  Shields,  P.  Maletinsky,  R.  Hübner,  M.  O. 

Liedke,  J.  Fassbender,  O.  G.  Schmidt,  and  D.  Makarov,  Purely  antiferromagnetic 

magnetoelectric  random  access  memory,  Nat . Commun . 8, 13985  (2017). 

[23]  Y.  Shiratsuchi,  Y.  Tao,  K.  Toyoki,  and  R.  Nakatani,  Magnetoelectric  induced  switching  of 

perpendicular  exchange  bias  using  30 -nm -thick  Cr 2O3 thin  film,  Magnetochemistry  7, 36 

(2021). 

[24]  N.  Lu,  P.  Zhang,  Q.  Zhang,  R.  Qiao,  Q.  He,  H. -B.  Li,  Y.  Wang,  J.  Guo,  D.  Zhang,  Z.  Duan, 

Z.  Li,  M.  Wang,  S.  Yang,  M.  Yan,  E.  Arenholz,  S.  Zhou,  W.  Yang,  L.  Gu,  C. -W.  Nan,  J. 

Wu,  Y.  Tokura , and  P.  Yu,  Electric -field  control  of  tri -state  phase  transformation  with  a

selective  dual -ion  switch,  Nature  546 , 124  (2017). 

[25]  L.  M.  Zheng,  X.  R.  Wang,  W.  M.  Lü, C.  J.  Li,  T.  R.  Paudel,  Z.  Q.  Liu,  Z.  Huang,  S.  W. 

Zeng,  K.  Han,  Z.  H.  Chen,  X.  P.  Qiu,  M.  S.  Li,  S.  Yang,  B.  Yang,  M.  F.  Chisholm,  L.  W. 

Martin,  S.  J.  Pennycook,  E.  Y.  Tsymbal,  J.  M.  D.  Coey,  and  W.  W.  Cao,  Ambipolar 

ferromagnetism  by  electrostatic  doping  of  a manganite,  Nat . Commun . 9, 1897  (2018). 

[26]  Z.  Q.  Liu,  H.  Chen,  J.  M.  Wang,  J.  H.  Liu,  K.  Wang,  Z.  X.  Feng,  H.  Yan,  X.  R.  Wang,  C. 

B.  Jiang,  J.  M.  D.  Coey,  and  A.  H.  MacDonald,  Electrical  switching  of  the  topological 

anomalous  Hall  effect  in  a non -collinear  antiferromagnet  above  room  temperature,  Na t. 

Electron . 1, 172  (2018). 

[27]  H.  Yan,  Z.  Feng,  S.  Shang,  X.  Wang,  Z.  Hu,  J.  Wang,  Z.  Zhu,  H.  Wang,  Z.  Chen,  H.  Hua, 

W.  Lu,  J.  Wang,  P.  Qin,  H.  Guo,  X.  Zhou,  Z.  Leng,  Z.  Liu,  C.  Jiang,  M.  Coey,  and  Z.  Liu, 

A piezoelectric,  strain -controlled  antiferromagnetic  memory  insensitive  to  magnetic  fields, 

Nat . Nanotechnol . 14 , 131  (2019). 20 

[28]  T.  Aoyama  and  K.  Ohgushi,  Piezomagnetic  properties  in  altermagnetic  MnTe,  Phys . Rev .

Mater . 8, L041402  (2024). 

[29]  Z.  Ni,  A.  V.  Haglund,  H.  Wang,  B.  Xu,  C.  Bernhard,  D.  G.  Mandrus,  X.  Qian,  E.  J.  Mele, 

C.  L.  Kane,  and  L.  Wu,  Imaging  the  Néel  vector  switching  in  the  monolayer 

antiferromagnet  MnPSe 3 with  strain -controlled  Ising  order,  Nat . Nanotechnol . 16 , 782 

(2021). 

[30]  H.  Lin,  K.  Zheng,  J.  Meng,  J.  Liu,  Z.  Zhao,  D.  Jiang,  Y.  Xu,  T.  Shang,  and  Q.  Zhan, 

Antiferromagnetic  magnetostriction  of  irmn  detected  by  angular  dependent  exchange  bias, 

Appl . Phys . Let t.  124 , 112414  (2024). 

[31]  X.  Bao,  H.  Yang,  Y.  Xie,  J.  Wang,  R.  He,  P.  Makushko,  L.  Pan,  Y.  Wang,  J.  Chen,  M.  Zou, 

R.  Zou,  C.  Liu,  L.  Guo,  T.  Zhu,  D.  Makarov,  and  R.  Li,  Flexible  exchange -biased  films 

with  superior  strain  stability,  Adv . Funct . Mater . 34 , 2409844  (2024). 

[32]  H.  Guo,  Z.  Feng,  H.  Yan,  J.  Liu,  J.  Zhang,  X.  Zhou,  P.  Qin,  J.  Cai,  Z.  Zeng,  X.  Zhang,  X. 

Wang,  H.  Chen,  H.  Wu,  C.  Jiang,  and  Z.  Liu,  Giant  piezospintronic  effect  in  a noncollinear 

antiferromagnetic  metal,  Adv . Mater . 32 , 2002300  (2020). 

[33]  P.  Makushko,  T.  Kosub,  O.  V.  Pylypovskyi,  N.  Hedrich,  J.  Li,  A.  Pashkin,  S.  Avdoshenko, 

R.  Hübner,  F.  Ganss,  D.  Wolf,  A.  Lubk,  M.  O.  Liedke,  M.  Butterling,  A.  Wagner,  K. 

Wagner,  B.  J.  Shields,  P.  Lehmann,  I.  Veremchuk,  J.  Fassbender,  P.  Maletinsky , and  D. 

Makarov,  Flexomagnetism  and  vertically  graded  Néel  temperature  of  antiferromagnetic 

Cr 2O3 thin  films,  Nat . Commun . 13 , 6745  (2022). 

[34]  Q.  Meng,  J.  Dong,  P.  Nie,  L.  Xu,  J.  Wang,  S.  Jiang,  H.  Zuo , J.  Zhang,  X.  Li,  Z.  Zhu,  L. 

Balents,  and  K.  Behnia,  Magnetostriction,  piezomagnetism  and  domain  nucleation  in  a

Kagome  antiferromagnet,  Nat . Commun . 15 , 6921  (2024). 

[35]  K.  Zhang,  Z.  Ma,  Y.  Sun,  K.  Shi,  Y.  Wang,  Q.  Sun,  Y.  Li,  S.  Deng,  J.  Cui,  Z.  Xia,  W.  Zhao, 

and  C.  Wang,  Superior  thermally  stable  giant  piezomagnetism  in  spin  frustrated  Mn 3Ir, 

Adv . Funct . Mater . 36 , 2424472  (2025). 

[36]  D.  Boldrin , A.  P.  Mihai,  B.  Zou,  J.  Zemen,  R.  Thompson,  E.  Ware,  B.  V.  Neamtu,  L. 

Ghivelder,  B.  Esser,  D.  W.  McComb,  P.  Petrov,  and  L.  F.  Cohen,  Giant  piezomagnetism  in 

Mn 3NiN,  ACS  Appl . Mater . Interface s 10 , 18863  (2018). 21 

[37]  F.  Formisano,  R.  M.  Dubrovin , R.  V.  Pisarev,  A.  K.  Zvezdin,  A.  M.  Kalashnikova,  and  A. 

V.  Kimel,  Laser -induced  THz  piezomagnetism  and  lattice  dynamics  of  antiferromagnets 

MnF 2 and  CoF 2, Ann . Phys . 447 , 169041  (2022). 

[38]  V.  T.  N.  Huyen,  Y.  Yanagi , and  M. -T.  Suzuki,  Anisotropic  piezomagnetism  in  noncollinear 

antiferromagnets,  Phys . Rev . B 112 , 104421  (2025). 

[39]  A.  Chen,  H.  Piao,  M.  Ji,  B.  Fang,  Y.  Wen,  Y.  Ma,  P.  Li,  and  X.  Zhang,  Using  dipole 

interaction  to  achieve  nonvolatile  voltage  control  of  magnetism  in  multiferroic 

heterostructures,  Adv . Mater . 33 , 2105902  (2021). 

[40]  H.  Chen,  Q.  Niu,  and  A.  H.  MacDonald,  Anomalous  hall  effect  arising  from  noncollinear 

antiferromagnetism,  Phys . Rev . Lett . 112 , 017205  (2014). 

[41]  H.  Iwaki,  M.  Kimata,  T.  Ikebuchi,  Y.  Kobayashi,  K.  Oda,  Y.  Shiota,  T.  Ono,  and  T. 

Moriyama,  Large  anomalous  Hall  effect  in  l12 -ordered  antiferromagnetic  Mn 3Ir  thin  films, 

App l.  Phys . Lett . 116 , 022408  (2020). 

[42]  I.  Tomeno,  H.  N.  Fuke,  H.  Iwasaki,  M.  Sahashi,  and  Y.  Tsunoda,  Magnetic  neutron 

scattering  study  of  ordered  Mn 3Ir,  J. Appl . Phys . 86 , 3853  (1999). 

[43]  Y. -W.  Oh,  S. -h.  Chris  Baek,  Y.  M.  Kim,  H.  Y.  Lee,  K. -D.  Lee,  C. -G.  Yang,  E. -S.  Park,  K. -

S.  Lee,  K. -W.  Kim,  G.  Go,  J. -R.  Jeong,  B. -C.  Min,  H. -W.  Lee,  K. -J.  Lee,  and  B. -G.  Park, 

Field -free  switching  of  perpendicular  magnetization  through  spin –orbit  torque  in 

antiferromagnet/ferromagnet/oxide  structures,  Nat . Nanotechno l.  11 , 878  (2016). 

[44]  S.  Peng,  D.  Zhu,  W.  Li,  H.  Wu,  A.  J.  Grutter,  D.  A.  Gilbert,  J.  Lu,  D.  Xiong,  W.  Cai,  P. 

Shafer,  K.  L.  Wang,  and  W.  Zhao,  Exchange  bias  switching  in  an 

antiferromagnet/ferromagnet  bilayer  driven  by  spin –orbit  torque,  Nat . Electron . 3, 757 

(2020). 

[45]  G.  S.  C.  Berm údez  and  D.  Makarov,  Magnetosensitive  e-skins  for  interactive  devices,  Adv .

Func t.  Mater . 31 , 2007788  (2021). 

[46]  H.  Yang,  S.  Li,  Y.  Wu,  X.  Bao,  Z.  Xiang,  Y.  Xie,  L.  Pan,  J.  Chen,  Y.  Liu,  and  R.  Li, 

Advances  in  Flexible  Magnetosensitive  Materials  and  Devices  for  Wearable  Electronics ,

Adv . Mater . 36 , 2311996  (2024) .

[47]  A.  Paetzold  and  K.  Röll,  Thermally  activated  self -alignment  of  exchange  coupling  in 

NiO/NiFe  bilayers,  J. Appl . Phys . 91 , 7748  (2002). 22 

[48]  J.  Wang,  X.  Bao,  J.  Chen,  M.  Zou,  Y.  Xie,  R. -W.  Li,  X.  Li,  Y.  Cao,  and  B.  Wang,  Room -

temperature  spontaneous  perpendicular  exchange  bias  in  IrMn/[Co/Pt] 3 multilayers,  New 

J. Phys . 26 , 093013  (2024). 

[49]  H.  Xi,  S.  Franzen,  S.  Mao,  and  R.  M.  White,  Exchange  bias  relaxation  in  reverse  magnetic 

fields,  Phys . Rev . B 75 , 014434  (2007). 

[50]  J.  C.  Slonczewski , Fluctuation  mechanism  for  biquadratic  exchange  coupling  in  magnetic 

multilayers,  Phys . Rev . Lett . 67 , 3172  (1991). 

[51]  J.  Slonczewski,  Overview  of  interlayer  exchange  theory,  J. Magn . Magn . Mater . 150 , 13 

(1995). 

[52]  A.  Cr épieux  and  C.  Lacroix,  Dzyaloshinsky -Moriya  interactions  induced  by  symmetry 

breaking  at  a surface,  J. Magn . Magn . Mater . 182 , 341  (1998). 

[53]  Y.  Ijiri,  T.  C.  Schulthess,  J.  A.  Borchers,  P.  J.  van  der  Zaag , and  R.  W.  Erwin,  Link  between 

perpendicular  coupling  and  exchange  biasing  in  Fe 3O4/CoO  multilayers,  Phys . Rev . Lett .

99 , 147201  (2007). 

[54]  E.  Y.  Vedmedenko,  P.  Riego,  J.  A.  Arregi,  and  A.  Berger,  Interlayer  Dzyaloshinskii -Moriya 

interactions,  Phys . Rev . Lett . 122 , 257202  (2019). 

[55]  W.  Chen,  Y.  Lin,  K.  Zhang,  Z.  Cao,  X.  Zhao,  Z.  Zhou,  X.  Wang,  S.  Yan,  H.  Du,  Q.  Leng, 

and  S.  Yan,  Spin  orbit  torque  locally  controlling  exchange  bias  to  realize  high  detection 

sensitivity  of  two -dimensional  magnetic  field,  Fundam . Res . 5, 2505  (2025). 

[56]  G.  S.  C.  Berm údez,  D.  D.  Karnaushenko,  D.  Karnaushenko,  A.  Lebanov,  L.  Bischoff,  M. 

Kaltenbrunner,  J.  Fassbender,  O.  G.  Schmidt,  and  D.  Makarov,  Magnetosensitive  e-skins 

with  directional  perception  for  augmented  reality,  Sci . Adv . 4, eaao2623  (2018). 

[57]  G.  Kresse  and  J.  Furthm üller , Efficient  iterative  schemes  for  ab  initio  total -energy 

calculations  using  a plane -wave  basis  set,  Phys . Rev . B 54 , 11169  (1996). 

[58]  J.  P.  Perdew,  K.  Burke,  and  M.  Ernzerhof,  Generalized  gradient  approximation  made 

simple,  Phys . Rev . Lett . 77 , 3865  (1996). 

[59]  P.  E.  Bl öchl,  Projector  augmented -wave  method,  Phys . Rev . B 50 , 17953  (1994). 

[60]  B.  Pradenas  and  O.  Tchernyshyov,  Spin -frame  field  theory  of  a three -sublattice 

antiferromagnet,  Phys . Rev . Lett . 132 , 096703  (2024). 23 

Fig . 1| Strain -induced switching of the antiferromagnetic state: towards AF -based 

memories. a , Schematic illustration of an AF memory device composed of an AF layer and a 

FM multilayer. The FM multilayer is utilized to read out the magnetic state of the AF layer.  b,

The equilibrium configuration of AF state 1 (bit  '' 1'' ) with inward Mn spins (violet) and 

downward Co spin (red). Here, green arrows show DMI coupling between Mn and Co spins.  c,

The schematic illustration of energy levels between two AF states during the swit ching from 

AF state  '' 0''  to AF state  '' 1'' . This switching is achieved under the application of a negative 

magnetic field  −Hext  and tensile strain. The initial energy symmetry between AF domains (grey 

dashed curve) is broken, resulting in energy asymmetry between AF domains (black solid 

curve).  d, The equilibrium configuration of AF state 2 (bit  '' 0'' ) with outward Mn spins and 

upward Co spin.  e, The schematic illustration of energy levels between two AF states during 

the switching from AF state  ''1''  to i ts opposite AF domain (AF state  '' 0'' ). This switching is 

achieved under the application of a positive magnetic field + Hext  and tensile strain.  f, The 24 

hysteresis loops revealing AF state  '' 1''  and  g, AF state  '' 0'' , these loops are measured via AHE. 

h, The switching behavior between the two AF  states over 100 write -read cycles. The magnetic 

state is read out at remanence, i.e. after removal of the mechanical strain and external magnetic 

field. During the switching process, the magnitude of applied magnetic field and mechanical 

strain is 2 kOe an d 1.2%, respectively. 25 

Fig . 2 | Deterministic manipulation of nonvolatile antiferromagnetic states. a , Normalized 

OOP Kerr loops with down magnetized state upon application (upper panel) and release of 

strain (lower panel).  b, Normalized OOP Kerr loops with up magnetized state (upper panel) and 

demagnetized state (lower panel) at different  ε. The magnitude of the magnetizing field is 2 

kOe.  c, Strain dependence of the measured  HPEB  with the sample in three different magnetized 

states. The data were calculated from the hysteresis l oops shown in panels (a) and (b).  d,

Normalized OOP MOKE loops of the mechanically relaxed sample set in the AF state  '' 1''  under 

different  ε. It should be noted that during this measurement, no magnetic field was applied 

during stretching process and the sample was left in  '' parallel mode '' . Details on the process are 

in Supporting Note 4.  e, Normalized hysteresis loops of the mechanically relaxed samples 

exposed to an external perturbing magnetic field ( Hext ) ranging from 0 to 60 kOe.  f, The 

dependence of  HPEB  and ∆ HC with strain and the p erturbing magnetic field for samples set in 

the AF state  '' 1'' .26 

Fig . 3 | Fundamentals of the strain -induced manipulation of the AF state in Mn 3Ir. a , Initial 

stages of the time evolution of  HPEB  in the samples exposed to different tensile strain. The color 

code represents the strength of  HPEB . The strain is increased step -wise to a specified value using 

different step sizes, details of the measuring protocols are provided in Supporting Note 10. The 

measurement is done with an increment of 1 min. During the entire stretching process, the 

sample  is exposed to magnetic field of 2 kOe prior to the strain.  b, Magnetizing time,  tmag ,

dependence of  HPEB  for the samples exposed to different tensile strain s. Symbols represent 

experimental data measured under different  ε. Solid curves delineate the fitted results through 

the Kolmogorov -Avrami model. In this measurement, strain is applied to the sample prior to 

the magnetizing process; details of the measuring protocols are provided in Supporting Note 

12.  c, Rate of increase of  HPEB , rPEB , with magnetizing time, the data are calculated from panel 

(b).  d, Schematics illustrating the magnetic structure of Mn 3Ir. The direction of uniaxial strain 

is indicated.  e, Calculated ∆ m of three magnetic moments in the unit cell as a function of tensile 

strains using DFT. A linear fit to the calculated values (symbols) is shown with the solid line. 

f, DFT -calculated components of the total magnetization per unit cell as a function of strain.  g,

Variation of the Ne él vectors  n1,2  = |n1,2 | with the applied strain  ε calculated using DFT and 

micromagnetic analysis.  h, Calculated change in the energy barrier as a function of strain for 

the reversal of Mn 3Ir magnetic domains. 27 

Fig . 4 | Demonstration of multi -cell operation in AF memory array. a , Schematic figure of 

the AFM memory arrays and the multi -cell (represented by 1, 2, 3, 4, respectively) write scheme. 

Each memory cell is read by AHE measurement.  b, The AHE curves for the four written unit 

cells shown in panel (a). Cells 1 -4 represent the binary information of  '' 1'' , '' 0'' , '' 1'' , '' 0'' ,

respectively. The binary information is also decoded by the  HPEB  indicated by the horizontal 

arrows in the AHE curves.