Title: Half-quantized anomalous Hall conductance in topological insulator/ferromagnet van der Waals heterostructures

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.10746v1

Published Time: Tue, 14 Apr 2026 01:24:30 GMT

Number of Pages: 9

Markdown Content:
# Half-quantized anomalous Hall conductance in topological insulator/ferromagnet van der Waals heterostructures 

Shahid Sattar, 1 Roman S. Stepanov, 1 Alexander Tyner, 2, 3 M. F. Islam, 4 A. H. MacDonald, 5 and C. M. Canali 1

> 1

Department of Mathematics and Physics, Linnaeus University, SE-39231 Kalmar, Sweden 

> 2

Nordita, KTH Royal Institute of Technology and Stockholm University, Hannes Alfv´ ens v¨ ag 12, 106 91 Stockholm, Sweden 

> 3

Department of Physics, University of Connecticut, Storrs, Connecticut 06269, USA 

> 4

Department of Physics, University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso, Texas 79968, USA 

> 5

Department of Physics, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, Texas 78712, USA 

(Dated: April 14, 2026) The half-quantized anomalous Hall conductance (AHC) in topological materials is a condensed matter physics realization of the parity anomaly of (2+1) quantum field theory and an important challenge for both theoretical and experimental research. A possible realization of this phenomenon may be achieved by interfacing a two-dimensional (2D) ferromagnetic (FM) layer with one surface of a thin slab of a topological insulator (TI), which breaks the otherwise conserved time-reversal symmetry, leading to a gap opening in the Dirac-like energy spectrum of the TI surface states. The resulting heterostructure can support chiral currents where only one spin channel contributes to transport, producing a half-quantized Hall conductance ( e2/2h). In this work, using first-principles methods together with tight-binding models, we investigate the magnetization-induced gap, the properties of the sidewalls states, and Hall conductance in three different FI/TI van der Waals heterostructures that are relevant for ongoing experiments. We also discuss the factors that can hinder the realization of exact half-quantization in a realistic system and their implication for the quantum anomalous Hall effect and the topological magnetoelectric effect. 

I. INTRODUCTION 

Three-dimensional (3D) topological insulators (TIs) are bulk magneto-electric materials characterized by a quantized axion field, whose electromagnetic action is de-scribed by the topological term Lθ = θ 

> 2πe2
> hc

E · B, where θ

is the Chern-Simons magnetoelectric coupling, taking the value θ = π (mod 2 π) for strong TIs [1–3]. When time-reversal symmetry is locally broken on the surface of a TI film by an out-of-plane exchange field, the 2D gapless linearly dispersive topological surface states acquire an energy (mass) gap at the Dirac point, which simultane-ously leads to the breaking of parity symmetry [2]. This phenomenon can be viewed as condensed matter physics realization of the well-known parity anomaly in (2-space + 1-time)-dimension field theory [4][5]. A remarkable consequence of the parity anomaly is the appearance of a parity-violating 2D electric current with a half quan-tized anomalous Hall conductance, σlocal  

> xy

= ± e2 

> 2h

, which provides a boundary manifestation of the bulk quan-tized magneto-electric axion field [6–8]. Indeed, the half-quantized anomalous Hall effect (1 /2-QAHE) on a mag-netized TI surface and the predicted quantized topologi-cal magneto-electric (TME) response associated with the quantized axion field are two closely connected phenom-ena and an example of the bulk-boundary correspon-dence. Detecting the effect of the parity anomaly in the form of the 1 /2-QAHE is however non-trivial, since ac-cording to the Nielsen-Ninomiya doubling theorem [9], Dirac cones in 2D always appear in pairs. Their com-bined contribution results in the restoration of the par-ity symmetry, which implies an overall integer QAHE, 

σlocal  

> xy

= ±n e2 

> 2h

with n = 0 , 1, 2 · · · . This is precisely the case of TI film, when both surfaces are magnetized, lead-ing to either the Chern insulator phase with an integer QAHE or to the axion insulator phase with zero Hall plateaus and large longitudinal resistance. Nevertheless, the fact that in a TI film the two Dirac cones appear on two distinct top and bottom surfaces, offers the pos-sibility of isolating their half-quantized anomalous Hall contribution [10]. The first experimental realization of the parity anomaly state in magnetic TI thin films was reported by Mogi et al. at temperatures up to 2K [11]. In this work, Cr doping on the top surface of a TI thin film breaks time-reversal symmetry and opens up a magnetic exchange gap in the surface Dirac cone, while the bottom surface remains gapless. Subsequently, Jain et al. raised the operating temperature to 10 K by coupling a mag-netic CrGe 2Te 6 layer to top surface of a TI thin film through exfoliation and mechanical stacking [12]. In both experiments, the Hall conductivity was observed to lie within a narrow window around the half-quantized value, 

σxy = (0 .48 −0.52) e 2/ℏ. Moreover, the presence of a non-zero longitudinal conductivity, σxx , in these experiments is attributed to the conductance arising from the metal-lic bottom surface states. Recently, Hu et al. achieved the layer 1/2-QAHE in a magnetic TI heterostructure, albeit at very low temperature of 30 mK, by positioning the Fermi level within the magnetic gap of the top sur-face and employed it as a probe of the quantized axion field [10]. In this context, several works discuss the pos-sibility of achieving magnetization-induced exchange gap at a selected TI surface using MnBi 2Te 4 [13–15]. 2D ferromagnets (FMs) having large out-of-plane mag-

> arXiv:2604.10746v1 [cond-mat.mes-hall] 12 Apr 2026

2netic anisotropy [16–18] have been proposed and widely used to induce sizable exchange gap in TI/FM van der Waals heterostructures [19–23]. Motivated by recent experimental advances, especially on the use of ferromagneticc layer in proximity to a TI in Ref. [12] , we considered 2D TI in the form of a six-quintuple-layer (6QL) Bi 2Se 3 thin film interfaced with three different 2D magnets to investigate magnetization-induced gap, layer-dependent Chern contributions and the resulting topological properties. An important open question in 1 /2-QAHE systems concerns the nature of the associated side-wall edge currents. In contrast to the exponentially localized edge states of the integer QAHE [24], recent theory has predicted that the edge-current distribution in half-quantized systems may exhibit amuch slower power-law decay away from the boundary [25]. This also provides a strong motivation to examine how the side-wall current in our vdW heterostructures decays away from the boundary. Finally, owing to the presence of non-zero longitudinal conductivity in exper-imental works [10–12], we also analyze whether metallic states originating from gapless bottom surface in our cal-culations can account for a finite longitudinal transport response. The paper is organized as follows: in Section II, we pro-vide computational details and methods employed in this study. In Section III, we discuss features of a 6QL-Bi 2Se 3

thin film which is used as a TI, followed by introduc-ing 2D FM layers. We then discuss electronic structure and topological characteristics of each FM/TI vdW het-erostructure in the subsequent sections. In Section IV, we provide results on side-wall edge transport and lastly, we summarized our findings in Section IV.  

> II. COMPUTATIONAL DETAILS

We performed first-principles calculations using den-sity functional theory (DFT) with projector augmented waves [26, 27] as implemented in the Vienna Ab-initio Simulation Package [28]. Generalized gradient approxi-mation in the Perdew-Burke-Ernzerhof parametrization was used to describe the exchange-correlation effects, with a plane wave cutoff energy set to 430 eV. The van der Waals interactions have been taken into account us-ing the DFT-D3 method with Becke-Johnson damping function [29]. A gamma-centered 9 ×9×1 and 12 ×12 ×1k-mesh was employed for the structural relaxation and self-consistent calculations, respectively. Due to the in-volvement of heavy elements, spin-orbit effects were al-ways included in the electronic structure calculations. To obtain iterative solution of the Kohn-Sham equations, we achieved an energy convergence of 10 −6 eV and a force convergence of 10 −3 eV/˚ A in our calculations. To avoid out-of-plane periodic image interactions, we have also used a 15 ˚ A thick layer of vacuum. To correctly de-scribe strong on-site Coulomb interactions of localized Mn or Cr d−electrons, we used Hubbard U correction (GGA+U method) following Dudarev’s scheme [30] and fixed the onsite Coulomb (U) and exchange (J) param-eters to the value of 3.9 eV and 0.0 eV for the case of MnBi 2Se 4, 3.0 eV and 0.9 eV for CrI 3, and 2.0 eV and 0.0 eV for Cr 2Ge 2Te 6, respectively. A real-space tight binding Hamiltonian was obtained based on maximally localized Wannier functions (MLWFs) using the Wan-nier90 package [31–33]. For this purpose, we used the VASP2WANNIER90 interface and included Mn/Cr −d

orbitals and Bi/Se/Te −p orbitals in generating the Wan-nier functions. The anomalous Hall conductivity (AHC) was computed within the intrinsic Berry-curvature for-malism for slab geometry using the Fermi-sea expres-sion implemented in the WannierBerri package [34] and is given below: 

σxy = − e2

ℏ

X

> n

Z

> BZ

d2k

(2 π)2 fnk Ωnz (k), (1) where fnk is Fermi-Dirac distribution function giving band occupation probability and Ω nz (k) is the Berry-curvature of n-th band. To analyze the layer-resolved topology, we further compute the partial Chern number 

C(l) for each orbital l, following the definition given in Ref. [7] and implemented in pcn package [35] via the following expression: 

C(l) = − 4πNk

Im X

> k

X

> v,v ′∈occ

ψvk(l) ψ∗

> v′k

(l) Fvv ′ (k) , (2) whereas ψvk(l) ψ∗

> v′k

(l) is the wavefunction amplitude at crystal momentum k on each orbital l, Fvv ′ (k) denotes the covariant-curvature matrix in the occupied-band sub-space, constructed from virtual transitions between occu-pied and unoccupied states and occupied bands labeled as ν and ν′. The layer-resolved Chern number is then obtained by summing C(l) over all orbitals belonging to the corresponding given layer.    

> III. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION A. Six Quintuple Layer Bi 2Se 3thin film as a TI and ferromagnetic candidates

Figure 1(a) shows the schematic of a pristine six-quintuple-layer (6QL) Bi 2Se 3 used as a topological in-sulator (TI) building block. Here, each rectangular block represents one QL stacked along the out-of-plane direc-tion. The calculated band structure of the pristine 6QL slab, shown in panel (b), clearly demonstrates the exis-tence of Dirac-like surface states at the high-symmetry Γ-point, a hallmark feature of 2D topological insula-tors. Importantly, DFT-D3 vdW correction with Becke-Johnson damping function [29] provides a band gap of 

∼ 1.1 meV, which is smaller than what is typically ob-tained using other van der Waals functionals [36]. It is pertinent to mention that obtaining a small bandgap 3

FIG. 1: (a) Schematic of a pristine six-quintuple-layer (6QL) Bi 2Se 3 thin film used as a topological insulator (TI). (b) Calculated electronic dispersion along the high-symmetry K → Γ → M path in Brillouin zone, showing the gapless Dirac cone near the Fermi level at Γ-point. (c) Schematic of TI/FM vdW heterostructure geometry considered in this work, where a ferromagnetic layer is placed at a distance d from the TI surface. The three ferromagnetic materials considered are monolayer Cr 2Ge 2Te 6 or CrI 3 or MnBi 2Te 4.for slab geometry is crucial for isolating the topological surface states and enabling robust proximity effects in heterostructures. Figure 1(c) depicts the heterostructure setup adopted in the present study, where a FM layer is placed in proximity to the 6QL Bi 2Se 3 slab at an in-terlayer distance d specific to each FM layer. Three dif-ferent 2D FM candidates are considered, i.e., monolayer Cr 2Ge 2Te 6 (CGT), CrI 3 (CrI), and MnBi 2Se 4 (MBSe). This setup allows us to examine time-reversal symmetry breaking at the TI top surface via magnetic-exchange and inducing a finite gap in one of the two Dirac cones coming from top and bottom surfaces.   

> B. Cr 2Ge 2Te 6as a ferromagnetic top layer

Analogous to the experimental setup adopted in Ref. [12] to realize 1 /2-QAHE, the TI/CGT heterostructure provides a natural starting point for our discussion. Akey feature of this heterostructure is the vdW contact between the top chalcogen layer of the TI (Se) and the surface chalcogen layer of CGT (Te). In this setup, the spatially extended and highly polarizable Te-5 p va-lence states, compared with the Se-4 p states, promote enhanced interfacial charge redistribution and hybridiza-tion in the vdW gap. An interlayer distance ( d = 2 .91) supports these observations. Figure 2 shows key features of the TI/CGT het-erostructure. As shown in Figure 2(a), the low-energy bands near the Fermi level are strongly modified around the Γ-point compared with those of the pristine Bi 2Se 3

slab. The highlighted region marks the topological surface-state manifold, whose detailed structure is en-larged in panel (b). The layer projections shown here distinguish contributions coming from the top QL (green color) and the bottom QL (red color), respectively. Aclear asymmetry is observed between the two surfaces: owing to hybridization with CGT, the top surface states are shifted away from the Dirac crossing and become gapped, whereas the bottom surface bands remain nearly gapless and retain an approximately Dirac-like disper-sion. This demonstrates that proximity from CGT acts predominantly on the top surface of TI and breaks time-reversal symmetry locally. We observe a bandgap open-ing of 45 meV in the top surface which is direct con-sequence of strong interlayer interactions between CGT and top-most QL of Bi 2Se 3.Figure 2(c) shows AHC computed as a function of Fermi energy for TI/CGT heterostructure. A striking feature is the emergence of Hall plateau, σxy = e2 

> 2ℏ

,within the energy range of gapped top surface. Combined with QL-projected band structure in Figure 2(b), this clearly demonstrates that a 1 /2-QAHE originates from the exchange-induced gapped top surface of Bi 2Se 3. The bottom surface, however, does not contribute to AHC owing to gapless nature of surface states. The metallic nature of bottom surface is also confirmed by computing the longitudinal conductivity ( σxx and σyy ), as shown in Supplementary Fig. S1, having non-zero contributions. Both components exhibit a pronounced dependence with nonmonotonic features in the energy range corresponding to the exchange gap. Overall, this scenario corresponds to a 1 /2-QAHE regime where a quantized transverse re-sponse coexists with a finite longitudinal conductivity (without destroying the quantization), allowing one to describe the system as exhibiting half-quantized AHC lo-calized on the top surface. To gain further insight into the origin of 1 /2-QAHE, 4

FIG. 2: (a) Band structure of vdW heterostructure using Cr 2Ge 2Te 6 (CGT) as a ferromagnetic layer on top of the 6-QL Bi 2Se 3 thin film. (b) Zoom region showing energy-gap between bands of top QL (in green color) and ungaped bands of bottom QL (in red color), respectively (c) AHC as a function of Fermi energy. (d) Berry curvature distribution showing a sharp peak at the high-symmetry Γ-point in the Brillouin zone. (e) Layer-projected Chern contributions across the CGT/TI heterostructure. we next analyze the Berry curvature (BC), as shown in Figure 2(d), which exhibits pronounced peaks concen-trated in a narrow region of k-space near the Γ-point and nearly vanishes away from this region. Firstly, this indi-cates that the dominant contribution to the AHC arises from the low-energy electronic dispersions near the Fermi energy. Secondly, the BC sharp peaks mainly originate near the band crossings/anticrossings around the Γ-point because of interband mixing and small energy denomi-nators, consistent with earlier studies [37]. However, in contrast to previous works, where such BC peaks are at-tributed to hybridization between states of top and bot-tom surface [38], in the present case they originate pri-marily due to hybridization of the top surface states with FM layer. Finally, we examine the sum of orbital-resoled layer-projected Chern contributions C(l), shown in Figure 2(e), which provides spatial distribution of the 1/2-QAHE. The maximal contribution is coming from the proximitized FM and the top-most QL of Bi 2Se 3 followed by a gradually decrease toward the bottom of the slab. This clearly indicates that the topological 1 /2-QAHE re-sponse is localized near the FM/TI interface. The total summed value ( P 

> l

C(l) = 0 .503) is in agreement with half-quantized AHC obtained in Figure 2(c).   

> C. MnBi 2Se 4as a ferromagnetic top layer

We next consider single-layer MnBi 2Se 4 (MBSe) as a FM contact to the 6 QL Bi 2Se 3 thin film, even though bulk MBSe is known to exhibit antiferromagnetic order. The resulting MnBi 2Se 4/Bi 2Se 3 heterostructure has not yet been realized experimentally, but it can be a promis-ing platform for achieving a half-quantized Hall response. With an interlayer distance of d = 2 .67 ˚ A, the interfacial interactions are dominated by Se atoms on both sides of the contact. The resulting charge-density difference here will be primarily determined by a redistribution of Se-4 p states. In contrast to the earlier Se–Te contact, this Se–Se charge environment produces a weaker inter-face step in the electrostatic potential and consequently a less pronounced Fermi-level shift relative to the Dirac states of the bottom TI surface. Figure 3 presents electronic dispersions corresponding to MBSe/Bi 2Se 3 vdW heterostructure. Refer to the band structure near the Γ point (magnified view of Fig. 3(a) in panel (b)), two groups of surface bands are clearly re-solved, associated with the top QL (green color) and bot-tom QL (red color) of the TI sample, respectively. Sim-ilar to the CGT case, proximity effect by the magnetic layer induces sizable exchange splittings and opens up a gap at the top surface, while the bottom surface remains essentially gapless. Overall, the system is metallic (shown in Fig. 3(b)). On the other hand, MnBi 2Se 4/Bi 2Se 3 vdW heterostructure also experience a half-quantized Hall re-sponse given in Figure 3(c). Similar to the previous case, 5

FIG. 3: (a) Band structure of vdW heterostructure using MnBi 2Se 4 (MBSe) as a ferromagnetic top layer on top of 6 QL Bi 2Se 3 thin film. (b) Zoom region showing energy-gap between bands of top QL (in green color) and ungapped bands of bottom QL (in red color). (c) AHC as a function of Fermi energy. (d) Berry curvature distribution along the K → Γ → M high-symmetry path in the Brillouin zone. (e) Layer-projected Chern contributions across the MBSe/TI heterostructure. the metallic character of electronic dispersion is preserved due to a parallel conducting channel on the bottom sur-face. The longitudinal response, given in Supplementary Figure S1(b), confirms the gapless nature of the het-erostructure. The longitudinal conductivity ( σxx ) in-creases when the Fermi energy is moved to positive do-main and shows a pronounced non-monotonic behav-ior. This trend is typical of a regime where addi-tional (interface-related) states become active, leading to changes in the Fermi-surface area, group velocities, and effective anisotropy, and consequently enhancing the longitudinal conductivity. Despite the presence of a dissipative channel, the AHC (σxy ), given in Fig. 3(c), remains close to the half-quantized value ( ≈ e2/2ℏ), indicating that the response is dominated by the topological contribution from the gaped top surface. Microscopically, this is consistent with Fig. 3(d), where the Berry curvature (Ω z (k)) is concen-trated in a narrow region of k-space near Γ, pointing to a localized origin of the main contribution to σxy due to band crossings. Finally, the layer-resolved Chern contri-butions ( C(l)) given in Fig. 3(e) show maximal effect at the top interface and rapidly decays into the subsequent QLs of the TI. This confirms our earlier observation that the 1 /2-QAHE is localized near the top surface, close to the FM overlayer, whereas the gapless bottom surface provides a parallel metallic channel.   

> D. CrI 3as a ferromagnetic top layer

In Fig. 4(a), we present results for the CrI 3/6QL Bi 2Se 3 heterostructure, similar to the two previous cases. The enlarged band structure near the Fermi energy and around Γ point (see Fig. 4(b)) reveals two groups of sur-face bands associated with the top QL (in green) and bottom QL (in red) of the heterostructure. Proximity to the magnetic layer induces an exchange splitting in the surface state of the top QL, despite the relatively large interlayer distance d = 3 .03 ˚ A, and opens up a gap, whereas the bottom surface states retains a Dirac-like dispersion near the Fermi energy. Thus, as in the pre-vious heterostructures, the system remains metallic due to a parallel conducting channel at the bottom surface. A distinctive feature compared to CGT and MnBiSe is the bottom surface bands forming a small Fermi-surface pocket. Consequently, their contribution to longitudi-nal transport is suppressed, as shown in Supplementary Information Fig. S2(c), and forms a minima in both 

σxx and σyy , with ( σxx ≈ σyy ) indicating weak in-plane anisotropy. Despite the presence of a metallic channel, the trans-verse response remains nearly quantized (Fig. 4(c)) at (≈ − e2/2ℏ). The residual deviation is not caused by a finite ( σxx ), but rather due to additional contributions to (σxy ) from interface subbands that depend on the details of orbital hybridization. Interestingly, the Berry curva-ture (Ω z (k)) in Fig. 4(d) seems to be concentrated within an extremely narrow region around (Γ). Unlike in the 6

FIG. 4: Band structure of vdW heterostructure using CrI 3 as a ferromagnetic top layer on top of 6 QL Bi 2Se 3 thin film. (b) Zoom region showing energy-gap between bands of top QL (in green color) and ungapped bands of bottom QL (in red color). (c) AHC as a function of Fermi energy. Berry curvature distribution along the K → Γ → M

high-symmetry path in the Brillouin zone. (e) Layer-projected Chern contributions across the CrI 3/TI heterostructure. previous two FM/TI heterostructures, this can be un-derstood from the absence of multiple low-energy band and avoided crossings in CrI 3/TI band structure. Fi-nally, the layer-resolved decomposition (Fig. 4(e)) shows that (C(l)) is maximal near the top interface and rapidly decays into the film thickness, while the total value (P 

> l

C(l) = 0 .505) is essentially equal to (1/2). This indicates that the topological contribution is localized at the topmost QL and is not related to bulk of the sam-ple, whereas the bottom surface primarily provides the parallel metallic channel. The negative sign of ( σxy ) is determined by the chosen magnetization orientation (the sign of the exchange term) and the corresponding chiral-ity of the Hall response.  

> IV. SIDEWALL STATES OF HETEROSTRUCTURE NANORIBBON

We conclude our study of the FM/TI heterostructures with the important analysis of the conducting electronic states present in a nanoribbon of finite width carved out of the infinite 2D films considered in the previous sec-tions. Specifically our results are shown in Fig. 5 for a 20 nm-wide naoribbon of the vdW heterostructure con-sisting of a FM CrI 3 monolayer positioned on top of a 6-QL Bi 2Se 3 TI thin film. In Fig. 5(a) we plot the quasi 1D band structure for the nanoribbon. The Fermi energy 

EF = 1 .82 eV is positioned inside the gap of the top (mag-netized) Dirac cone and crosses the conducting states of the gapless bottom Dirac cone. Panel (b) shows the local density of states LDOS at the Fermi energy on the cross-section of a nanoribbon. Panel (c) plots instead the top-view LDOS, as a function of nanoribbon horizontal (y) position, while (d) plots the sidewall LDOS (along the pe-riodic direction x), as function of the vertical (z) position. Focusing specifically on panel (b) starting from the bot-tom of the ribbon, we can clearly distinguish the topologi-cal quasi-2D states coming from the gapless Dirac cone of the un-magnetized surface. Moving up, non-topological edge states strongly pinned close to the left and right sidewalls of the ribbon. Approaching the magnetized top surface with a gapped Dirac cone, the nature of these sidewall states changes. Here they are characterized by a gradual decay into the inner part of the ribbon that is slower than for the lower SLs; they are spin-polarized and chiral, as it is shown in panels (d) and (e) where we plot the dispersions of ribbon quasi-1D states projected onto the left and right side-walls surfaces. In a Chern insula-tor phase (of a FM/TI/FM three-layer heterostructure) together with their counterpart coming from the equally magnetized bottom layers, these state generate the chiral states responsible for the integer QAHE. In the present case, although they are not “proper” topological chiral edge states, they give rise to spin polarized chiral currents which lead to the 1/2 QAHE of the FM/TI heterostruc-ture. It is indeed remarkable that these states, albeit do not possess the same strong topological character of the Chern insulator chiral edge states, in the end lead to the exact half-quantization of the parity anomaly phase. 7

FIG. 5: (a) band structure of a quasi-1D nanoribbon of a vdW heterostructure consisting of a CrI 3 a FM monolayer coupled to a 6 QL Bi 2Se 3 thin film. (b-d) Spatial distribution of the local density of states (LDOS) for the nanoribbon geometry, presented in three projections: (b) cross-sectional view; (c) top view, as a function of the horizontal (y) position; (d) along the periodic (x) direction, as a function of the vertical (z) position. The arrow indicates the periodic direction along the x-axis, while no periodicity is present along the y- and z-axes. Numbers 1 and 2 denote the position of the localized states at the left and the right edge, respectively. ((e,f) Sidewall-state dispersion for the 1-left and 2-right sidewalls: these band structures are obtained by projecting the full quasi-1D band-structure of the nanoribbon onto the left and right sidewalls respectively. Note the feeble left-moving and right moving 1D states located respectively on the left (1) and right (2) sidewalls.  

> V. CONCLUSION

In conclusion, by using first-principles methods com-bined with microscopic tight-binding models we have investigated, the electronic, magnetic and transport poperies of three different van der Waals heterostructures consisting of a topological insulator thin film and a fer-romagnetic layer positioned of top of the TI surface. Us-ing first-principles methods together with tight-binding models, we have shown that, for the TI surface where time-reversal symmetry is broken by the contiguous FM layer a gap open up at the Dirac cone of the 2D topo-logical surface state, while the other Dirac cone remains gapless. The size of the exchange gap (of the order a few tens meV) and the relative position of the gapped Dirac cone with respect to gapless cone depend on the FM layer oof the heterostructure. In any case, the Fermi energy of the heterostructure always crosses the energy band of the gapless Dirac cone, which therefore will always pro-vide dissipative conducting sates to the overall transport properties of the system. A calculation of the AHC for an infinite 2D het-erostructures (no sidewall) shows that AHC is indeed ex-actly half-quantized when the Fermi energy is positioned inside the exchange gap of the Dirac states of the magne-tized surface, regardless of the presence of the dissipative conducting sates coming from the gapless surface. How-ever, we argued that, although these states do not con-tribute to the Hall response, they will indirectly affect the exact quantization since they do contribute to the longitudinal resistance, which remains finite. These the-oretical results are, in fact, consistent with and explain the experimental findings [10–12] that the AHC in our studied FM/TI vdW heterostructure is half quantized within a few-percent accuracy. Our theoretical analysis of the surface states of a quasi-1D heterostructure nanoribbon further demonstrates the presence of the conducting surfaces states of the un-magnetized TI surface. Importantly, this analysis also elucidates the crucial role played by the sidewall states close to the magnetized surface in establishing spin-polarized chiral currents slowly decaying inside the bulk of the nanoribbon, which are ultimately the physical ori-gin for the half quantization of the Hall conductance char-acterizing the parity anomaly phase. 8

[1] X.-L. Qi, T. L. Hughes, and S.-C. Zhang, Topological field theory of time-reversal invariant insulators, Physical Review B—Condensed Matter and Materials Physics 78 ,195424 (2008). [2] A. M. Essin, J. E. Moore, and D. Vanderbilt, Magneto-electric polarizability and axion electrodynamics in crys-talline insulators, Physical review letters 102 , 146805 (2009). [3] D. Vanderbilt, Berry phases in electronic structure the-ory: electric polarization, orbital magnetization and topo-logical insulators (Cambridge University Press, 2018). [4] A. N. Redlich, Parity violation and gauge noninvariance of the effective gauge field action in three dimensions, Phys. Rev. D 29 , 2366 (1984). [5] In (2 + 1)-dimension field theory, a gauge invariant reg-ularization process, necessary when a classical parity-symmetric theory for massless fermions is quantized, leads inevitably to the breaking of parity. [6] R.-L. Chu, J. Shi, and S.-Q. Shen, Surface edge state and half-quantized hall conductance in topological insu-lators, Physical Review B—Condensed Matter and Ma-terials Physics 84 , 085312 (2011). [7] N. Varnava and D. Vanderbilt, Surfaces of axion insula-tors, Physical Review B 98 , 245117 (2018). [8] T. Rauch, T. Olsen, D. Vanderbilt, and I. Souza, Geomet-ric and nongeometric contributions to the surface anoma-lous hall conductivity, Physical Review B 98 , 115108 (2018). [9] H. Nielsen and M. Ninomiya, Absence of neutrinos on a lattice: (i). proof by homotopy theory, Nuclear Physics B 185 , 20 (1981). [10] J. Hu, B. Wang, H. Zhou, T. Jia, Z. Sun, C. Liu, B. Zhang, D. Qian, T. Li, X. Xie, et al. , Half-quantized layer hall effect as a probe of quantized axion field, Na-ture Communications (2026). [11] M. Mogi, Y. Okamura, K. M., R. Yoshimi, Y. K., A. Tsukazaki, K. S. Takahashi, T. Morimoto, N. Na-gaosa, M. Kawasaki, Y. Takahashi, and Y. Tokura, Experimental signature of the parity anomaly in asemi-magnetic topological insulator, Nat. Phys. 18 , 390 (2022). [12] R. Jain, M. Roddy, V. Gupta, B. Huang, H. M. Sayeed, H. F. Alnaser, A. Vashist, K. Watanabe, T. Taniguchi, V. V. Deshpande, et al. , A quantized anomalous hall ef-fect above 4.2 k in stacked topological insulator/magnet bilayers, arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.05380 (2024). [13] R. Lu, H. Sun, S. Kumar, , Y. Wang, M. Gu, M. Zeng, Y.-J. Hao, J. Li, J. Shao, X.-M. Ma, Z. Hao, K. Zhang, W. Mansuer, J. Mei, Y. Zhao, C. Liu, K. Deng, W. Huang, B. Shen, K. Shimada, E. F. Schwier, C. Liu, Q. Liu, and C. Chen, Half-magnetic topological insula-tor with magnetization-induced dirac gap at a selected surface, Phys. Rev. X 11 , 011039 (2021). [14] M. Gu, J. Li, H. Sun, Y. Zhao, C. Liu, J. Liu, H. Lu, and Q. Liu, Spectral signatures of the surface anomalous hall effect in magnetic axion insulators, Nat. Comm. 12 ,3524 (2021). [15] A. Honma, D. Takane, S. Souma, K. Yamauchi, Y. Wang, K. Nakayama, K. Sugawara, M. Kitamura, K. Horiba, H. Kumigashira, et al. , Antiferromagnetic topological in-sulator with selectively gapped dirac cones, Nature Com-munications 14 , 7396 (2023). [16] C. Gong, L. Li, Z. Li, H. Ji, A. Stern, Y. Xia, T. Cao, W. Bao, C. Wang, Y. Wang, et al. , Discovery of intrinsic ferromagnetism in two-dimensional van der waals crys-tals, Nature 546 , 265 (2017). [17] B. Huang, G. Clark, E. Navarro-Moratalla, D. R. Klein, R. Cheng, K. L. Seyler, D. Zhong, E. Schmidgall, M. A. McGuire, D. H. Cobden, et al. , Layer-dependent ferro-magnetism in a van der waals crystal down to the mono-layer limit, Nature 546 , 270 (2017). [18] J. L. Lado and J. Fern´ andez-Rossier, On the origin of magnetic anisotropy in two dimensional cri3, 2D Materi-als 4, 035002 (2017). [19] Y. Hou, J. Kim, and R. Wu, Magnetizing topological surface states of bi2se3 with a cri3 monolayer, Science advances 5, eaaw1874 (2019). [20] X. Yao, B. Gao, M.-G. Han, D. Jain, J. Moon, J. W. Kim, Y. Zhu, S.-W. Cheong, and S. Oh, Record high-proximity-induced anomalous hall effect in (bi x sb1–x) 2te3 thin film grown on crgete3 substrate, Nano letters 

19 , 4567 (2019). [21] P. Li, Y. You, K. Huang, and W. Luo, Quantum anomalous hall effect in cr2ge2te6/bi2se3/cr2ge2te6 het-erostructures, Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter 33 ,465003 (2021). [22] A. E. Llacsahuanga Allcca, X.-C. Pan, I. Miotkowski, K. Tanigaki, and Y. P. Chen, Gate-tunable anoma-lous hall effect in stacked van der waals ferromagnetic insulator–topological insulator heterostructures, Nano Letters 22 , 8130 (2022). [23] V. Gupta, R. Jain, Y. Ren, X. S. Zhang, H. F. Alnaser, A. Vashist, V. V. Deshpande, D. A. Muller, D. Xiao, T. D. Sparks, et al. , Gate-tunable anomalous hall effect in a 3d topological insulator/2d magnet van der waals heterostructure, Nano Letters 22 , 7166 (2022). [24] W. G. Vandenberghe and M. V. Fischetti, Imperfect two-dimensional topological insulator field-effect transistors, Nature communications 8, 14184 (2017). [25] J.-Y. Zou, B. Fu, H.-W. Wang, Z.-A. Hu, and S.-Q. Shen, Half-quantized hall effect and power law decay of edge-current distribution, Phys. Rev. B 105 , L201106 (2022). [26] P. E. Bl¨ ochl, Projector augmented-wave method, Phys. Rev. B 50 , 17953 (1994). [27] G. Kresse and J. Furthm¨ uller, Efficient iterative schemes for ab initio total-energy calculations using a plane-wave basis set, Phys. Rev. B 54 , 11169 (1996). [28] G. Kresse and D. Joubert, From ultrasoft pseudopoten-tials to the projector augmented-wave method, Phys. Rev. B 59 , 1758 (1999). [29] S. Grimme, S. Ehrlich, and L. Goerigk, Effect of the damping function in dispersion corrected density func-tional theory, Journal of computational chemistry 32 ,1456 (2011). [30] S. L. Dudarev, G. A. Botton, S. Y. Savrasov, C. Humphreys, and A. P. Sutton, Electron-energy-loss spectra and the structural stability of nickel oxide: An lsda+ u study, Phys. Rev. B 57 , 1505 (1998). [31] N. Marzari and D. Vanderbilt, Maximally localized gen-eralized wannier functions for composite energy bands, Phys. Rev. B 56 , 12847 (1997). [32] A. A. Mostofi, J. R. Yates, G. Pizzi, Y.-S. Lee, I. Souza, 9

D. Vanderbilt, and N. Marzari, An updated version of wannier90: A tool for obtaining maximally-localised wannier functions, Computer Physics Communications 

185 , 2309 (2014). [33] G. Pizzi, V. Vitale, R. Arita, S. Bl¨ ugel, F. Freimuth, G. G´ eranton, M. Gibertini, D. Gresch, C. Johnson, T. Koretsune, et al. , Wannier90 as a community code: new features and applications, Journal of Physics: Con-densed Matter 32 , 165902 (2020). [34] S. S. Tsirkin, High performance wannier interpolation of berry curvature and related quantities with wannierberri code, npj Computational Materials 7, 33 (2021). [35] N. Varnava, pcn, https://github.com/ nicodemosvarnava/pcn (2018). [36] T. K. Reid, S. P. Alpay, A. V. Balatsky, and S. K. Nayak, First-principles modeling of binary layered topo-logical insulators: Structural optimization and exchange-correlation functionals, Physical Review B 101 , 085140 (2020). [37] N. Nagaosa, J. Sinova, S. Onoda, A. H. MacDonald, and N. P. Ong, Anomalous hall effect, Reviews of modern physics 82 , 1539 (2010). [38] J.-Y. Zou, R. Chen, B. Fu, H.-W. Wang, Z.-A. Hu, and S.-Q. Shen, Half-quantized hall effect at the parity-invariant fermi surface, Physical Review B 107 , 125153 (2023).